[Amit Varma]: What is your instinctive reaction when you hear an outrageous idea that challenges conventional
[Amit Varma]: wisdom? I think all of us recoil a little bit because it is tempting to stick to our
[Amit Varma]: picture of how the world works, what is possible and what is not possible. It takes too much
[Amit Varma]: mental energy to keep shifting our frameworks as it were. But over time, I've learned
[Amit Varma]: to fight this reflexive reaction. Humanity progresses not because of those who follow
[Amit Varma]: the conventional path and build better mousetraps, but because of those who dream audacious dreams.
[Amit Varma]: That is why, for example, I don't join in the fashionable mockery of Elon Musk. Just
[Amit Varma]: look at the things he's done and is trying to do. Bloody hell, we need a hundred more
[Amit Varma]: Elon Musks. We need to celebrate moonshots and crazy ideas. We need to let dreamers keep
[Amit Varma]: chasing their dreams. And yes, they'll often fail. But when they succeed, they can change
[Unknown]: the world. Welcome to The Seen and the Unseen, our weekly
[Unknown]: podcast on economics, politics and behavioral science. Please welcome your host, Amit Verma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to The Seen and the Unseen. My guest today is Vinay Singhal, who was born in a
[Amit Varma]: small village in Haryana and who was the first graduate in his family. His earliest ambition
[Amit Varma]: was to be the richest man in the world. When he read that Bill Gates was the richest man
[Amit Varma]: in the world at that time, he decided to out-Gates Gates by building the best operating system
[Amit Varma]: in the world. That didn't go far, but he did go on to build a site called WittyFeed that
[Amit Varma]: for a while was second in the world only to BuzzFeed for viral content. That journey ended
[Amit Varma]: suddenly and devastated Vinay. He spent time moaning and introspecting and then dreaming
[Amit Varma]: again. And now he runs Stage, which he describes as a Netflix for Bharat. Stage is more than
[Amit Varma]: an OTT for regional languages. It is an OTT for regional dialects. As he tells me in this
[Amit Varma]: remarkable conversation, cities have languages, towns and villages have dialects, and we don't
[Amit Varma]: need to homogenize culture. Instead, we need to celebrate our diversity by enabling it.
[Amit Varma]: So far, Stage creates content not in Hindi or Tamil or Bengali or such major languages,
[Amit Varma]: but dialects like Haryanvi and Rajasthani, and has led to almost a reverse migration
[Amit Varma]: from Bollywood as industries have sprung up around those dialects. People who speak them
[Amit Varma]: no longer feel like outcasts in big cities needing to lose themselves to fit in. I was
[Amit Varma]: blown away by my conversation with Vinay for two reasons. One, the depth of his self-reflection,
[Amit Varma]: which made him learn from every setback and become a better person. And two, the audacity
[Amit Varma]: of his dreams and the clarity of his thinking. I left our conversation as a believer, not
[Amit Varma]: just in this venture, but in Vinay himself. This man will do amazing things. Before you
[Amit Varma]: see for yourself why I felt that way, let's take a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: Have you always wanted to be a writer, but never quite gotten down to it? Well, I'd love
[Amit Varma]: to help you. Since April 2020, I've taught 20 cohorts of my online course, The Art of
[Amit Varma]: Clear Writing. An online community has now sprung up of all my past students. We have
[Amit Varma]: workshops, a newsletter to showcase the work of students, and vibrant community interaction.
[Amit Varma]: In the course itself, through 4 webinars spread over 4 weekends, I share all I know about
[Amit Varma]: the craft and practice of clear writing. There are many exercises, much interaction, a lovely
[Amit Varma]: and lively community at the end of it. The course costs Rs 10,000 plus GST or about $150
[Amit Varma]: and is a monthly thing. So if you're interested, head on over to register at indiauncut.com
[Amit Varma]: slash clear writing. That's indiauncut.com slash clear writing. Being a good writer doesn't
[Amit Varma]: require God-given talent, just the willingness to work hard and a clear idea of what you
[Amit Varma]: need to do to refine your skills. I can help you.
[Amit Varma]: Vinay, welcome to the scene and the unseen. Thank you, Amit. It's a pleasure. Absolute
[Amit Varma]: pleasure. Thank you. Ever since a couple of months back, you agreed to come on the show
[Amit Varma]: when I was in Delhi next. I've been looking forward to, you know, before we talk about
[Amit Varma]: Witty Feed and before we talk about Stage.in, let's sort of talk about you and talk about
[Amit Varma]: your early life. You know, where did you grow up? What was your childhood like? Tell me
[Guest]: about that. So I grew up in a very small village in Haryana, 50-60 old houses. So much so that
[Guest]: I was the first ever engineer from my village that way. And first ever graduate in my own
[Guest]: family basically. Nobody had gone to a college before me, essentially. So I grew up there.
[Guest]: It's a Hindi medium school. I went to a private school that way. And so grew up there mostly.
[Guest]: My family, my father, my mom, both of them are, so to say, unperturbed, illiterates that
[Guest]: way, right? I don't know if that's the right way to address them, but they were very aware
[Guest]: about the fact that kids should be taught. And so they made a lot of focus on that. So
[Guest]: sent me to a private school, essentially. Grew up around that. After that, we shifted
[Guest]: to a town in English medium school for the first time. First time in 9th grade, I basically
[Guest]: reached English medium school. And before that, I was good at studies, basically. And
[Guest]: basically I used to be a class-topper, school-topper, that way. Very favorite of my teachers, so
[Guest]: to say, right? You do well in the village, anyways, like that. And I reached English
[Guest]: medium school. And English medium school, I was basically at the bottom of the list
[Guest]: because I couldn't understand what was going on, basically, right? And I remember an anecdote
[Guest]: actually from my school that way. It was a chemistry class, 9th grade. And our teacher,
[Guest]: she was a South Indian, so Pandey ma'am, and I over time grew very fond of her. But anyway,
[Guest]: initial days, she was South Indian, so a certain accent of English, her Hindi had a certain
[Guest]: accent, etc, right? So she was teaching. And I was sitting, I couldn't understand anything,
[Guest]: basically. I was clueless. So I was sitting with a book upside down, basically. And, sorry,
[Guest]: not upside down, actually I was sitting with a physics book in that class. And she was
[Guest]: like, Vinay, what happened? Which class are you in? Chemistry class. The book is of physics.
[Guest]: And which is when I was like, what the hell? But anyways, yeah, so made my way through
[Guest]: it. It's a scene where you come in first in the class, favorite of your teacher, etc.
[Guest]: And then you are basically nobody, nobody, you're at the bottom of the class, nobody
[Guest]: cares about you. Nobody, basically, asks who are the backbenchers, who are not getting
[Guest]: good marks, right? So I kind of made a sort of a determination that in 10th class, when
[Guest]: I pass out of CBSE, I will become a topper in the school, essentially, again, basically.
[Guest]: And anybody I would have told would have basically laughed at it, right? I remember, I had a
[Guest]: study table in my house. I sketched it with my own hands. And I said, 94%, basically,
[Guest]: my dream for 10th class. And in 9th class, I hardly passed, basically, I must have scored
[Guest]: some marks, essentially, and continue to work very hard. Again, preboards, rewards. At the
[Guest]: end of it, when I passed the class, I actually topped it. I scored 93.5% marks. So it was
[Guest]: probably one of the early achievements of life. And that way, I felt that if you put
[Guest]: your mind to something, if you, if I really, you know, go after something, I probably can
[Guest]: do anything. It kind of made me believe that, yeah, I can do anything. There's nothing that
[Guest]: I can't do, right? So I did that. After staying there for two years, again, after 10th class,
[Guest]: it was time to decide what I wanted to do in life, basically, right? So, from my village,
[Guest]: from my school, basically, I didn't have any education at home, so who would have told
[Guest]: me what I wanted to do in life, right? So, many of the students were going to Kota, essentially.
[Guest]: And I asked them, what are you going to do there? What is the Kota scene, essentially?
[Guest]: So they told me that there is such coaching, doctors will be made. Some of my good friends
[Guest]: were Dr. Allen Institute, of the very famous Allen, of course. At that time, it was not
[Guest]: a very known name, at least in my village. So we will go there and all. And I somehow
[Guest]: had this vague idea in my mind that my father wanted me to become a doctor. And so I said,
[Guest]: man, I will also go to Kota, I will become a doctor. So I landed in Kota, spent two years
[Guest]: over there, quite interesting, quite an amazing journey. Going there, for the first time in
[Guest]: my life, I discovered medical, non-medical, different streams. I discovered that, IITs,
[Guest]: NITs, and AIIMS, and all these institutes. For the first time in my life, I came to know
[Guest]: the meaning of MCQ. And in the process, I also ended up discovering that there is something
[Guest]: called passion. People live and die for it. I actually discovered the word passion in
[Guest]: Kota. Kota, actually, I did not become a doctor, but it was the turning point of my life, in
[Guest]: a way. I really believe that those were the two most important years of my life. And I
[Guest]: probably learned more about life in those two years than I learned in probably the rest
[Guest]: of my life at that point in time. For the first time, you step out of the protection
[Guest]: and you realize that it's such a huge world, right? Kota was the definition of huge world
[Guest]: to me, but it was such a huge world still, right? Big buildings, AIIMS, you know, and
[Guest]: all of that stuff, basically. So I spent two years in Kota, and there was a lot that happened
[Guest]: around that time. Just one more thing before I finish this part. I discovered, when I saw
[Guest]: a computer for the first time, when I was in 10th class, when I was in 10th class, I
[Guest]: saw a computer for the first time in my life, in our lab. I saw it in the lab on the 9th.
[Guest]: On the 10th, I had a computer with a senior, basically, and classmates, some of our classmates
[Guest]: would gather and say, we have to prepare a model test paper, a CBC exam paper, so let's
[Guest]: get it from the internet. And we went and he did something, and all of a sudden he had
[Guest]: papers and he wrote. And basically, that was the time when I saw it with internet for the
[Guest]: first time. Computer plus internet, I saw for the first time. He wrote on Google, CBC
[Guest]: model test papers, a website came, everything was there, he took it out. And to me, it was
[Guest]: all magic. Basically, he wanted anything, and I asked him a lot of questions, and he
[Guest]: was like, yes, whatever you want on the internet, write it, you get everything here, and all
[Guest]: that stuff, right? I think I fell in love with computers on, like love at first sight
[Guest]: sort of scene, basically, right? And so I made my father buy me one. Like, within the
[Guest]: next 60 days, I think we bought one. It was a big deal. It was a big event in our house,
[Guest]: right? It was about 100 kilometers away from our village, in a town called Jhunjhunu. We
[Guest]: went to buy a computer from there, because my uncle was on that side, so if you need
[Guest]: someone to tell you, because a machine for 35-40 thousand rupees is a very big deal.
[Guest]: Who buys a computer? It was something that was, and again, in the 10th grade, most people
[Guest]: would tell my father, why are you buying it? He'll play games on it, he won't do anything,
[Guest]: basically, right? And what is the need in the 10th grade and all, but I somehow felt
[Guest]: that if I learn something from this, I'll basically do something other than what everybody
[Guest]: else is doing and all, right? So, he brought me from Jhunjhunu in the 10th grade, and again,
[Guest]: for me, the internet was the entire meaning of it, right? So, the dial-up connection back
[Guest]: in the day, the 256 kbps connections, right? Now, with the scratch card of SNL, I connected
[Guest]: it and the first search that I made on it was, who is the richest person in the world?
[Guest]: And of course, the irony of life, Bill Gates came at that time, and how did he become?
[Guest]: He became, that he made computers, which I'm using today, basically, this box useful, essentially.
[Guest]: Like, he made it, he made the software, which made it useful for everybody. And so, everybody
[Guest]: has a PC today, right? And so, his operating system was the best in the world. So, everybody
[Guest]: bought it at that one time. And so, whatever, basically, the simpler definition of it. So,
[Guest]: I grew up in a Marwadi family, basically, Baniyas, my father used to run that, right?
[Guest]: And so, if there is one topic that you want to discuss and have some commonality in a
[Guest]: Baniya family or in a Marwadi family, it's money. That's something that you grow up with
[Guest]: that. I keep joking that, and then all of a sudden, you come and say, everybody will
[Guest]: like be quiet and listen to you, essentially, right? So, I grew up around the idea of money
[Guest]: a lot, right? And so, the other part, which is that I wanted to be best at it, I don't
[Guest]: know how, but somehow, my life has always been, I feel that if I do something, I should
[Guest]: do my best in life, then there is no point in doing less than that. So, money was the
[Guest]: definition of success, told by my family to me, and my surroundings, and best is what
[Guest]: I wanted to become. So, my first aspiration in life became that I want to become the richest
[Guest]: person in the world. That was my sort of a goal that way, right? But I ended up in quota
[Guest]: to become a doctor, and which is where I discovered that I don't want to become a doctor. So,
[Guest]: a lot of these points in my life story that you will probably discover now in next couple
[Guest]: of hours is that it has been a lot about what do I not want to do, instead of to be able
[Guest]: to figure out what do I want to do, right? I think that is also a very efficient system.
[Guest]: If you understand that you don't want to do this, then you have at least one less option
[Guest]: to worry about, right? We were taught in the preparation of AIPMT that there are four options,
[Guest]: either you know the answer, or you know which three are wrong, right? So, you can also find
[Guest]: an answer by elimination. So, probably that kind of state with me, right? So, I discovered
[Guest]: that I don't want to become a doctor. I used to score physics, chemistry, and bio in three
[Guest]: classes, right? So, it used to be like 50-50 and 100. 50-50 marks in physics and 100 marks
[Guest]: in chemistry. Basically, I used to get double marks. I don't know the exact number now.
[Guest]: I don't remember it. So, I used to get equal marks in all three classes. I used to get
[Guest]: 50 marks in physics and 100 marks in biology, right? So, it kind of got clear that I don't
[Guest]: want to become a doctor, right? But then I had made my father spend so much money being
[Guest]: there and all, right? So, it was very hard to go back. So, I used those two years to
[Guest]: figure out what to do. Let's understand a little. Let's not become a doctor. So, I remembered
[Guest]: that when you got a computer, you wanted to become the richest person in the world. How
[Guest]: do you become? How do the richest people in the world become? And I remembered that Bill
[Guest]: Gates is there. Bill Gates made the operating system. So, that's what happened. So, I decided
[Guest]: that it's very simple. I don't want to do anything. I want to make an operating system
[Guest]: which is better than this one. If I make an operating system better than Windows, then
[Guest]: the whole world will use my operating system and I will become the richest person in the
[Guest]: world. I literally used to carry a pocket diary and I would write features. Like, I
[Guest]: will make this, this is missing in Windows and all of that stuff basically, right? So,
[Guest]: but I went to become a doctor in Kota. So, what to do? So, my father's dream and plus
[Guest]: believing that it's my father's dream. So, I made a plan that let's do one thing. First,
[Guest]: I will do MBBS. Then I will do MBA because we can do business with it. And then I will
[Guest]: make this company and that's how I will become this thing and all, right? After two years,
[Guest]: I wrote AIPMT exams, all that stuff, right? So, I was doing BDS, BDS basically, right?
[Guest]: But I knew that if I do this, then basically it will be a miserable life. I don't want
[Guest]: to become a doctor no matter what. And I gathered courage. I came back home. I came from Kota.
[Guest]: It takes around 5-6 lakhs to stay there for at least two years, right? And it was a very
[Guest]: big amount for a family, which is basically running a grocery store, right? So, I courageously
[Guest]: said to my father, sorry, I know you want me to become a doctor, but I don't want to
[Guest]: become a doctor. And he was like, when did I ask you to become a doctor? So, I was like,
[Guest]: what happened? I was there for two years for no reason. I don't care if you become a doctor
[Guest]: or not. And then he said something, I think that became one of the most important cornerstones
[Guest]: of my life, sensibly. He said, look, son, I have spent my life here in the village,
[Guest]: I have worked very hard, I have lived with respect, basically, right? I have never borrowed
[Guest]: money from anyone, I have given it to someone. And again, in his way of living a respectable
[Guest]: life, right? All I want from you is, I don't care if you are successful or not, it's okay,
[Guest]: it's not necessary in life, everyone will be successful and all. But I just want that
[Guest]: my head should never be high because of you, it should never be low. And I was of course,
[Guest]: I teared up and I was like, it stayed with me. And I think till date, when I make decisions,
[Guest]: I go back, think about it, that I am not doing anything which is going to probably make him
[Guest]: feel bad about it. And his head should not be low, basically, that's what I keep remembering.
[Guest]: So, from there, he told me, I came to Delhi, I went to CBSC's office, I said, I am a biological
[Guest]: student, but I want to become an engineer. So, that I figured out that if I want to make
[Guest]: a computing system, then basically, I will have to become an engineer, I will have to
[Guest]: do computer engineering. So, for that, I need non-medical, I had discovered all that in Kota.
[Guest]: So, here in Delhi, in Paharganj, there is an office in CBSC, I came there. So, I went
[Guest]: and said, boss, I have to do engineering, what should I do? Which is when they told
[Guest]: me that you write a supplementary exam for maths. And if you pass in maths this year,
[Guest]: then it will be done. And I took an admission in Akash Institute in Janakpuri. So, there,
[Guest]: when I went to the first class of maths, you are sitting in dropper ears again, right?
[Guest]: So, the teacher came, he did the first chapter, I remember only one thing of 11th and 12th
[Guest]: maths, which is the first chapter of subsets. So, there are symbols of subsets and basically,
[Guest]: there are ups and downs, essentially, right? So, he came and started teaching all this.
[Guest]: And he was teaching dropper ears, what was the teacher's fault? I asked the person
[Guest]: in the class, brother, what does this mean? The one who is making C upside down, sometimes
[Guest]: here, sometimes there, what does this mean? And which is when this guy says, what are
[Guest]: you doing? Are you making fun of me? I mean, you are sitting in dropper ears, you are
[Guest]: sitting in the wrong class, what is the scene? I said, no, brother, you tell me, I do not
[Guest]: know all this. Because I had no idea about 11th and 12th maths, what happens, what does
[Guest]: not happen. But again, that year came out and thankfully, I passed in the maths exam.
[Guest]: I have been scared twice in my life, which I remember very distinctly. One is when I
[Guest]: wrote that maths board exam, I cried a lot before that night. Because if I fail in that
[Guest]: exam, then there is no hope, essentially, because basically, I left biology a year ago
[Guest]: and if I do not pass maths, then I cannot write engineering exams. I will not get into
[Guest]: an engineering college. And I basically will be nowhere, right? And another 3-4 lakhs
[Guest]: has gone down the drain for my father. So I cried a lot and went to write that exam.
[Guest]: But again, thankfully, passed in that. I got some 68-69 marks. Again, exam, so distinctly
[Guest]: I remember how many marks I got. Passed it, went into SRM and like that's how the engineering
[Guest]: journey started. I probably took a longer time to answer this.
[Amit Varma]: No, no, it was beautiful. The story about your dad is also so moving. And what you said
[Amit Varma]: about, you know, the first time you saw a computer and I had that same feeling in the
[Amit Varma]: 90s, when the first time I discovered and someone told me you can search for anything
[Amit Varma]: and all the pages that there are in the world on that subject, you can see them and this
[Amit Varma]: was in the early days. So actually, there were limited pages. It's crazy, right? It's
[Amit Varma]: crazy. You can imagine that. I remember Arthur C. Clarke's quote that any sufficiently advanced
[Amit Varma]: technology is indistinguishable from magic. So I try to think about that and not take
[Amit Varma]: all of this stuff for granted, whether it is computer internet or GPS or the AI that
[Amit Varma]: is doing it. You know, it's all so magical, but we get very jaded. I want to ask you a
[Amit Varma]: question following on from like this very interesting concept I learned recently, which
[Amit Varma]: has made me introspect a lot and think a lot. I came across it in this book called Wanting
[Amit Varma]: by Luke Burgess. And he was a disciple of the philosopher Rene Girard. So Rene Girard,
[Amit Varma]: a few decades ago, he's a philosopher, but he was asked to teach a literature class.
[Amit Varma]: So he needed the money. He said, okay, I'll teach you. So for that, he went through a
[Amit Varma]: reading list. And when he read all those great novels, which were in the reading list, he
[Amit Varma]: found that they all have one thing in common, that all the characters in the novel, the
[Amit Varma]: main characters in the novel, what they want, they don't want it because it's a genuine
[Amit Varma]: deep interior want, they want it because somebody else wants it. And he termed this thing mimetic
[Amit Varma]: desire that, you know, you want something because somebody else wants it. Or if you're
[Amit Varma]: a young person growing up in India, I'll get married, I'll have kids. But why? Because
[Amit Varma]: it's the way things are done. So you think you want it, but you don't really. I got to
[Amit Varma]: learn about the frame of thick desires and thin desires. Thick desire is what is intrinsic
[Amit Varma]: to you. That's a thick desire. And a thin desire is a desire, which is not intrinsic
[Amit Varma]: to you. And the interesting thing is that thin desires can be very intense. Whereas
[Amit Varma]: a thick desire can hide in the background. That is going to be intense, not necessarily.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, it's very counterintuitive. So the thick desire can be hiding in the background. And
[Amit Varma]: the thin desire, which can often be a desire for fame or money or whatever, can be in the
[Amit Varma]: forefront can be intense. And so I'm interested in and this is both a question about you,
[Amit Varma]: and also a question about the sort of milieu in which you grow up, grow up in the people
[Amit Varma]: all around you. That an older question that I sometimes ask is, why those specific dreams?
[Amit Varma]: Why do we want those things? Why do we want what we want, which you know, ties into this
[Amit Varma]: question. And you've mentioned sort of turning on the computer and your first search is who
[Amit Varma]: is the richest person in the world. Because obviously, if you're a young kid, you're growing
[Amit Varma]: up in a village, that's the most important thing, right? You think that's what you want.
[Amit Varma]: And I feel that what happens is that as we go along on that journey, initially, we might
[Amit Varma]: want to be rich or famous or whatever. But later, it becomes modified in the sense that
[Amit Varma]: we see money as a means to an end. Yeah, that something larger opens up, like I would
[Amit Varma]: imagine what the internet would have opened up for you was a thick desire of learning
[Amit Varma]: about the world, and figuring out what to do and all of that. Yeah. So I want you to
[Amit Varma]: tell me a little bit about sort of your dreams and your desires. Because what happens is
[Amit Varma]: that if you have no exposure to the world, let's say you thought experiment, you have
[Amit Varma]: a 10 year old who's grown up in a room for 10 years with no exposure to the world, what
[Amit Varma]: does that person want? It's going to be very limited, right? But, you know, so it's all
[Amit Varma]: it depends on what is your environment? What is your mahal? What do people around you want?
[Amit Varma]: How society is evolving, that shapes you into wanting whatever you want. So you tell your
[Amit Varma]: journey from this lens that what were the things you desired? And how did that during
[Amit Varma]: these years sort of evolve? And also, I know, it's a separate question. So also, what people
[Amit Varma]: around you, you know, what do you feel about that, that, in a sense, what you do through
[Amit Varma]: your site, or what any content person really does in whatever they do, is they expand the
[Amit Varma]: universe of their viewers. And in expanding that universe, you can make them want differently
[Amit Varma]: because you're looking at the universe in a different way. Take me through this.
[Guest]: Just to double click on the second part that you just said, I think, is one of the reasons
[Guest]: why I got into content and I continue to remain in content is because I, one of my strongest
[Guest]: belief is that there is nothing more powerful than content as a medium of mass influence.
[Guest]: And yeah, we, by telling these stories, and by creating these different content pieces,
[Guest]: we expand the horizon of the universe of a person who consumes that content, essentially,
[Guest]: right? So, like I said, I think the very first aspiration in life I remember is becoming
[Guest]: the richest person in the world, right? That's what I remember. It was, it has to be a thin
[Guest]: desire because I no longer want it, one. And second, I now know for a fact that it was
[Guest]: influenced by the environment around me, right? Like I said, the environment I grew up in,
[Guest]: money is like probably one of the most important thing, you know, that you grow up around.
[Guest]: And by the way, I don't mean that in a bad way. I don't think there is anything wrong
[Guest]: with it. The world we live in, it runs on money. And so you need it. And the community
[Guest]: that I come from has a certain way of taking care of it basically, right? And I think that
[Guest]: has helped me a lot in becoming the person that I become. I'm very careful about money.
[Guest]: I'm very, I don't know, I think I know how to handle my finances. I'm a financially literate
[Guest]: person that way. I'd like to believe that. And most of it comes from, again, the place
[Guest]: where I grew up, right? But then I think growing up where we grew up, it was like a lower middle
[Guest]: class setting, right? Gaon hai, 50-60 ghar hai, papa dukaan chala rahe hain. Dukaan chala
[Guest]: rahe hain is probably a little too extreme, I'm saying. Gaon ke baniye hain, we were well
[Guest]: to do relatively in that particular place. We would be very poor when you compare it
[Guest]: with some place, let's say in Delhi, but in our village, we were okay to do, we were well
[Guest]: to do, right? So, I basically understood about money. I understood about how to even build
[Guest]: a business, you know, how to treat people, how to... So, for example, one of the best
[Guest]: things about my father that I carried from him in my business is that gaon mein wahan
[Guest]: aaj ka kaam bhi karte the dukaan mein, basically. Kisan se anaaj lena hain, phir mandi mein
[Guest]: usko beechna, trader, basically, right? That way. So, you need a lot of labor to carry
[Guest]: on those tasks, etc. And I know that all their lunch used to be cooked by my mom throughout.
[Guest]: Ghar mein, woh wahiin baith ke khaana khaate the, jahaan hum khaate the, basically. And
[Guest]: a lot of these people I would address as chacha, etc, etc, right? And which ended up giving
[Guest]: me very important life lessons, like, people are people. Their economic status doesn't
[Guest]: define who they are and how you treat them, essentially, basically, right? And I don't
[Guest]: think my father was trying to teach me that, but he ended up basically teaching me that
[Guest]: in the process and all, basically. Aisi aur bahot saari gaon... humari dukaan mein ek
[Guest]: poster laga rehta tha and which I again carry with me till date and a philosophy that I
[Guest]: use in my business. It used to say that, dukaan mera mandir, grahat mera devta. And you can
[Guest]: find it in most of the Marwadi family shops, basically. And today, Jai Bajos writes a white
[Guest]: paper on this saying that, you know, how, why should you build customer first businesses
[Guest]: and whatever, basically, right? And becomes a huge philosophy and like the entire startup
[Guest]: world is like, Jai Bajos is a god and all. But it was, it's as simple as that, right?
[Guest]: Ki dukaan aapka woh holy space hai, where you build it. It has to be as holy as a temple,
[Guest]: which means you hold yourself to the highest level of integrity, honesty, you do the most
[Guest]: important things, etc. And then at the same time, grahat mera devta, that there's nothing
[Guest]: bhagwan se upar toh kuch nahi hai. Toh grahat agar aapka bhagwan ke barabar hai, toh basically
[Guest]: you treat them like that, right? So, I learned that and again, unknowingly, I carried it.
[Guest]: I like to believe that we have built very customer first businesses over time and, and
[Guest]: integrity has been one thing, one value that I don't like to compromise on. You do whatever,
[Guest]: sab kuch maaf hai, lekin integrity pe aap compromise nahi kar sakte hai, essentially.
[Guest]: Actually, yeh sab cheezein, again, mere environment, mere aas paas ke cheezein, how my family treated
[Guest]: me and they behaved probably around that. So, I learned from there. Then once I went
[Guest]: to Kota and I discovered the world, I discovered that, like you said, money just means to an
[Guest]: end. And I think I discovered it in Kota, but I didn't know it. And then I realized
[Guest]: when I was in college, when I ended up in Chennai in college and like a 100x larger
[Guest]: world suddenly opened up, right? Haryana to Kota is you don't, you don't get a culture
[Guest]: shock. From there you go to Chennai and like you have a college which has like people from
[Guest]: all over the country, including Chennai itself, etc. And like there's a culture shock that
[Guest]: you realize that this country is so large, there's so many people. I, of course, I also
[Guest]: had aged by then. So, I, and I had access to computer, internet, etc. So, my knowledge
[Guest]: had expanded to a very large extent compared to where it was, again, relatively. So, now
[Guest]: I knew that money only is a means to an end. Money allows you to do what you want to do,
[Guest]: but it cannot be the goal because then you have a very shallow goal, right?
[Guest]: You can make money through so many different ways, right? And it matters why you want to
[Guest]: do what you want to do. And so, it matters how you make that money essentially. And then
[Guest]: why do you want to make it the way you want to make it essentially, right? So, I think
[Guest]: those questions became important. And credit where due, one of my college senior, his name
[Guest]: is Harsh Manitrapati. He's an entrepreneur himself, sold one of his companies to UpGrad.
[Guest]: So, he was the one who basically helped me discover this, you know, he, he asked me this
[Guest]: in the first year, second year, we met in end of first year. So, he asked me in the
[Guest]: second year that, why do you like, what do you want to do? What's your actual goal in
[Guest]: life? And I used to say that I want to become the richest person and all that stuff, right?
[Guest]: And he asked me why? And I gave all the wrong reasons. I don't want to work for anyone.
[Guest]: I want to make a lot of money. I want to be famous. And I don't like to do a job. I don't
[Guest]: think I made for a job, all of that stuff. And then I ended up at a place where I realized
[Guest]: that, you know, it doesn't matter if I do a job, doesn't matter if I make a lot of money
[Guest]: or not make a lot of money. I, what I want to do is that I want to do something that
[Guest]: really matters that, that, you know, what gives me, for example, every time I watch
[Guest]: a movie where an underdog wins, I cry, right? For when I see a scene filled with compassion
[Guest]: without an exception, I cry, right? So, those are the things that make me click, right?
[Guest]: And so, I realized that all I want to do is just help people. And if in the process, you
[Guest]: know, if I can make a lot of money, great, awesome. If I, if not, then probably not,
[Guest]: right? And which is why in the first year itself, and again, articulation happened in
[Guest]: second year when Harsh Bia asked me about all this, but first year itself, I started
[Guest]: an NGO. Again, I don't talk about it a lot anymore, but I started an NGO. I discovered
[Guest]: that I'm a very patriotic person. I love my country and like very intrinsic desire to
[Guest]: do something with the country and like all that feeling, right? So, I started an NGO
[Guest]: called Badlega Bharat, and which was triggered by nothing but simple that I realized that
[Guest]: youth in this country, we keep saying that 67% of the population of this country is a
[Guest]: young population, below 35, assertive. But I saw most people around me in college were
[Guest]: preparing for GRE, they're going to write an exam, go do MS somewhere and then never
[Guest]: coming back, right? So, these guys are not assets, probably. These are, at least I thought
[Guest]: at that point in time, again, has changed to a large extent now, but I thought these
[Guest]: are liabilities. You know, these guys are just going to go away from this country. They're
[Guest]: not going to probably come back here ever again, not care about this. They don't care
[Guest]: the problems that we have in this country. I thought like that. And so, I said, nobody
[Guest]: speaks to the youth in their language, the language that they understand. Nobody talks
[Guest]: to us with respect and asks us, and what you're going to tell me, it matters. So, I started
[Guest]: this NGO called Badlega Bharat. Then the idea was that we'll talk about the issues around
[Guest]: youth, etc. in their own language, and we understand. So, it was also probably my first
[Guest]: content company, because this NGO was nothing but a website. I learned to make websites
[Guest]: just for that, along with, and I found my co-founders also because of that. One of the
[Guest]: best things that happened to me ever, Shashank, Shashank Vaishnav, I found him because of
[Guest]: that. So, we started this NGO called Badlega Bharat, and it was basically a blog, where
[Guest]: we would have six, seven sections, and we would write about like, incredible India,
[Guest]: did you know, and like something like six, seven sections. And as the luck would have
[Guest]: it, 2010 ki baat hai yeh sab, the Anna Hazare movement happened, right? And discovered even
[Guest]: the deeper, like, very deep desire to do something with the country, etc. Again, we became very,
[Guest]: we joined the movement, of course, most of the people did at that point in time, we led
[Guest]: the student movement in Chennai, for that, for the first time ever in SRM University,
[Guest]: we did a sort of a political event, we carried out a candle march with 3000 students taking
[Guest]: a part in it, like, crazy stuff, you know, I would, from our college is like a suburban
[Guest]: area, SRM is at, like, 40-45 kilometers away from the main city, we would take a local
[Guest]: train every day after college in the evening, go to the protest site in Chennai, and like
[Guest]: be part of that three, two, three hours, like all chanting all that stuff. And I had some
[Guest]: photos, like, I'm giving an interview and all that stuff, very, very high energy stuff,
[Guest]: basically, back in those days, right? In the process, I think we also realized ki yaar
[Guest]: shakti free mein nahi hoti hai, you need money, even to run an NGO and to do all things we
[Guest]: want to do. And which is what led us to starting this company, essentially. So, yeh Harsh bhaiya
[Guest]: se humaari mulaqat aise hai, end of first year, we started this in the second semester,
[Guest]: end of first year, so we became sort of famous because of this candle march and all. And
[Guest]: so Harsh bhaiya reached out to us, he discovered us, he reached out to us, he met us, very
[Guest]: clearly remember it. And this was the last day of our first year. We met in a canteen
[Guest]: and he asked us like, yaar, bahut sahi hai, bahut amazing kaam kar rahe ho, tum super
[Guest]: proud hai, and he had his own company already running at that point in time. He said, tum
[Guest]: mere liye website banaoge, tum logon ne website banate seekha hai, why don't you do it for
[Guest]: me, and I'll pay you for it. And which is when we were like, okay, this could be a very
[Guest]: good way for us to make money. And we use that money to basically fuel our NGO and
[Guest]: basically do it, what we want to do. That's how we started our first ever company, essentially
[Guest]: the end of first year of engineering. So we started that. Another reason I, since we were
[Guest]: talking about dreams, etc, another reason I wanted to, we started that NGO and I wanted
[Guest]: to build this was because, and this was before the movement divided, got divided into a movement
[Guest]: and a political party, etc. I always believe that politics is a very holy profession, if
[Guest]: done for the right reasons and the right ways, and is the one of the most effective ways
[Guest]: of creating large scale impact. Again, coming back to the same thing that I wanted to create
[Guest]: large scale impact. So I've been very fascinated by politics as a profession. And mere life
[Guest]: may though be hags. So one of them is that I genuinely believe that at some point in
[Guest]: time, let me say this anyways, out loud on your podcast, it is going to go to some people,
[Guest]: but then anyways, that I will, I believe that I will become the prime minister of this country
[Guest]: one day. It's not a dream anymore. I genuinely believe that it will happen at some point
[Guest]: in time. And second is that I will die on Mars. I will not live here for the entire
[Guest]: life. I genuinely again believe in the mission of making humans a multi planetary species
[Guest]: and setting up cities on Mars. And within my lifetime, I believe I'll end up on Mars
[Guest]: and I'll take my final breath over there. So, Badlika Bharat, one of the reason was
[Guest]: also because I wanted to actually turn it into a myneta.info. So I actually wanted to
[Guest]: create a platform like that. If you go to buy a mobile phone, you can compare it with
[Guest]: a lot of different companies, a lot of different price points, you can compare it feature wise.
[Guest]: And we are deciding our fate for the next five years and we don't have any way to compare
[Guest]: the people that we are voting for on their merits. And so I wanted to build a platform.
[Guest]: Badlika Bharat's larger vision was actually to do that and so change the country through
[Guest]: making impact in politics, essentially. If we change politics, the country will change
[Guest]: itself. That was a thought, basic thought around it. Once we got into entrepreneurship,
[Guest]: that kind of took a backseat over time and like this, the other side of it took off and
[Guest]: so happened. So the reason I'm in content now coming to that is also for the same reasons
[Guest]: that and I heard this concept for the first time, thick desire and thin desire. I feel
[Guest]: it's one of my thick desires that I just want to do anything that allows me to do something
[Guest]: with the masses. That's my calling, if that is the right word to quote here. To content
[Guest]: again, no, I believe that is the most powerful medium of mass influence and distribution
[Guest]: content. Maybe if content is king, distribution is good. I keep saying that. So the real game
[Guest]: is of distribution, right? We record this podcast, if let's say 10 people hear it versus
[Guest]: 10,000 people hear it, it makes a lot of difference in the value that we can create like both
[Guest]: of our time, right? So that's why what I'm doing, I wait if it got shut down, I again
[Guest]: started a content company for the same reason that I believe it's one of the most powerful
[Guest]: ways of being able to create a change at a mass level, etc, etc. I don't know if this
[Amit Varma]: answers your question at all. No, no, it's wonderful. And for what it's worth, I don't
[Amit Varma]: find your two aims outlandish at all. I mean, it is not something that, you know, my sense
[Amit Varma]: is that the people who actually achieve things are the people who dream big, right? So you
[Amit Varma]: should have big dreams, you know, and you can either dream big by, you know, sitting
[Amit Varma]: in a room or sitting quietly in office or not doing something about it. But clearly
[Amit Varma]: from your biography, you've been out there and you're always doing things and you're
[Amit Varma]: always trying new things. I want to ask you sort of a broader question about a clash that
[Amit Varma]: I think all of us face in our lives and a clash that determines the direction people
[Amit Varma]: go down on and certain kinds of people may go in different directions. And that's a clash
[Amit Varma]: between having passion slash principles slash dreams, and also responding to incentives
[Amit Varma]: and taking reality into account and going, you know, sort of, according to that, for example,
[Amit Varma]: you know, at one point, you know, in one of your other interviews, you've spoken about
[Amit Varma]: how, you know, there were nine of you, which became seven of you who, you know, first started
[Amit Varma]: the thing. And it was only the three of you who were passionate enough to stick with it
[Amit Varma]: and so on. And the others kind of drifted away. And because you know, other priorities
[Amit Varma]: came and all of that. And equally in another context, you mentioned politics. And what
[Amit Varma]: I often say about politics is that politics will always corrode character, because you
[Amit Varma]: can get into politics for all the right reasons that these are my principles. I want to do
[Amit Varma]: all these good things. But then the reality of politics is that to rise within a political
[Amit Varma]: system, you make so many compromises and all of that, that by the time you actually get
[Amit Varma]: somewhere, those initial principles have all gone, or at best, they are posturing, your
[Amit Varma]: actions have changed who you are, it doesn't matter anymore. For example, I wrote a column
[Amit Varma]: once about why, you know, people ask the question, why were our freedom fighters such great leaders?
[Amit Varma]: And why don't we have that quality of leader today? And my candidate answer for that was
[Amit Varma]: key, you know, those guys had no power to lust for, they were animated by higher principles,
[Amit Varma]: they had no power to lust for. So you attracted that kind of principled person who didn't
[Amit Varma]: give a shit about consequences, and they were in it. And and today, it's all a game of you
[Amit Varma]: have an all powerful predatory state, it's all a game of power, power interacts with
[Amit Varma]: money in specific ways that you know, we know about, and it attracts, therefore, that kind
[Amit Varma]: of person. So, you know, and therefore, it also seems to me that the kind of person who
[Amit Varma]: says, key, mujhe karna hi hai, that, you know, you've, you've spoken about how through all
[Amit Varma]: your ventures, every time you think you're doing well, something or the other will bring
[Amit Varma]: you crashing down. And then you go again, and then you go again, and then you go again.
[Amit Varma]: And I can totally imagine that at different points of the journey, you could easily have
[Amit Varma]: said ki theek hai yaar engineering, job le letao yeh kar letao, let me do something safe
[Amit Varma]: or let me whatever, but you get up and you keep trying again. And that takes a particular
[Amit Varma]: kind of person. And most people would not do that they would at some point be practical,
[Amit Varma]: they would say key, you know, my chances of success are 1% 99% I'm going to fail, let
[Amit Varma]: me just get the guaranteed income and build a stable life and all of that. And you didn't
[Amit Varma]: do that. And looking around you, you know, so what is your sense of that? Because you've
[Amit Varma]: been on this journey with people who have moved away and given up and with people who
[Amit Varma]: stuck to it. And in this on this general larger question of, you know, being principled and
[Amit Varma]: sticking to something because you're passionate about it, or just taking a conventional route,
[Amit Varma]: you know, but I mean, how do you look at it? And what are the observations you made during
[Guest]: this journey on this?
[Guest]: So let me first state that it's not like there has never been an instance where I've not
[Guest]: thought about it. Right? As you must have found during your research, there have been
[Guest]: a lot of ups and downs, right? So there are times where I have thought about it. There
[Guest]: are times where my family said, what the hell, basically, why are you struggling so much?
[Guest]: Right? And I just turned 31 three days ago. And I think it's not that old, but I feel
[Guest]: very old because of probably the kind of experience we have had in last, I've been doing this
[Guest]: for 12 years now. And I had my fair share of it, right? So it has happened that, dad
[Guest]: says a lot of times, given the startup environment out there, I can probably get a crore or so
[Guest]: as a salary out there, right? I've also thought about it a lot of times, dad says, if we spend
[Guest]: affluently, we can spend 10 lakhs. That's it. 10-12 lakhs, lakhs a month. Our family
[Guest]: doesn't have the courage to spend more than that. I mean, they don't even know how to
[Guest]: spend more than that, basically, right? On our normal day-to-day life, basically. So
[Guest]: even if I get half of what I just said, this is more money than our family can ever consume,
[Guest]: basically, right? Which is when I realized that it's probably not about money for me
[Guest]: anymore. Like one of the validations that I got, that this is not about money, and I'm
[Guest]: not doing it for money anyways, right? And I think I will never make the mistake of saying
[Guest]: that this is very easy, or once you believe in something, it all comes out. No, no, it
[Guest]: doesn't happen like that. It's very hard to stick to what you believe in. Principal
[Guest]: life is a very troubled life, to be honest. There has been instances where there has been
[Guest]: offers where I could have made easy money, even in the business, right? And I decided
[Guest]: not to. And again, I've gotten slack from my family, even from my co-founders at times,
[Guest]: and I'm like, man, it's all because of your values. But then I think, I tell them the
[Guest]: same thing, man. And see, a lot of times, like it's been 10-12 years, we have a lot
[Guest]: of our peers who have made companies, who are doing well, someone got an exit, someone
[Guest]: raised a crown, someone got secondaries, so they live an affluent life and all, right?
[Guest]: One of my co-founders was telling me once that he met one of those people in some event,
[Guest]: and he's doing like a, he met one of our peers, basically. Not even peers, he used to be our
[Guest]: affiliate at some point in his life. And he's now doing phenomenally well, he's made a
[Guest]: lot of money in life. And he met him, one of my co-founders met him. And he said, I
[Guest]: met him and I went back to my hotel and I cried. And I kept kind of like, what am I
[Guest]: doing with my life? I think it has happened to me also. There are times when our peers
[Guest]: do really amazingly well, and I want to, I feel happy for them. But I feel very sad for
[Guest]: myself. I feel jealous, to be honest. You know, it feels, I've been doing it. When things
[Guest]: don't work out, you ask yourself, I haven't done anything wrong to anyone, basically,
[Guest]: in a very desi term, I haven't done anything wrong to anyone. So why the hell is it? So
[Guest]: you, there are, my point, the point, the larger point I'm trying to make is that sense of
[Guest]: doubt prevails at all times, to be honest. It's there, a constant question mark hovering
[Guest]: right over your head at all times. Right? But then I think a sense of purpose in life
[Guest]: outweighs all of it. When once you, once you realize that, I'm not able to remember who
[Guest]: to credit it for. I think it's a quote from a novel. When you feel jealous of someone,
[Guest]: when you feel, you should be willing to, you know, replace every aspect of your life with
[Guest]: every aspect of their life. I go back and ask myself that, do I want to be Amit? And
[Guest]: do I want to be everything that Amit is today versus what I am, which includes my family,
[Guest]: my wife, you know, and, and, and it, it, it reminds me that I am so much more beyond just
[Guest]: my work and I have a life and a family and, and so much more. Right. And, and I think
[Guest]: it helps me a lot to continue basically. I can keep doing what I'm doing for a long time,
[Guest]: basically. I think it was the most liberating thing that ever happened to me. The fact that,
[Guest]: and again, I'm, I'm an entrepreneur, I'm building a company, so I am a capitalist person at
[Guest]: the end of the day. So I'm, I'm not saying I'm a socialist. I'm not saying that I will
[Guest]: distribute all my money, whatever the hell. Right. I'm saying I want to make money, but
[Guest]: I am not driven by it anymore. Right. I don't care about how much I make anymore. Right.
[Guest]: And like you said, it's a means to an end and it's very important distinction between
[Guest]: us. And, and most people don't, I think most people don't realize that. Right. I think
[Guest]: it has been a liberation from there onwards.
[Guest]: Right. Every other player is an incumbent, every other player. I know we'll talk about
[Guest]: it later, but point being that it was a very hard thing to do, but did it because it felt
[Guest]: like the right thing to do. So I think if any listener out there wants to live a principled
[Guest]: life, I would say if the first thing you should do is sit down and resolve your feelings about
[Guest]: money and how you feel about it, because the world we live in today, money, you may not
[Guest]: know it, but it, it does impact every decision we make every second out there. So yeah, that's
[Guest]: what I would say.
[Amit Varma]: That's inspiring. And that's a fantastic frame also, that if you feel jealous of someone
[Amit Varma]: replace every aspect of their lives, I'm, I'm going to use it on myself every time I
[Amit Varma]: look at someone and say, I wish. And also another aside, I think, you know, being a
[Amit Varma]: capitalist is not something anybody should say apologetically. I think capitalist is
[Amit Varma]: a good word because, you know, as you would know, being a Baniya, how do you make money?
[Amit Varma]: You make money by being, making someone else better off by giving them what they want and
[Amit Varma]: what their value, you know, that whole thing about being Bhagwan, you know, it's a positive
[Guest]: something that somebody feels valuable enough that they're ready to pay for it, which means
[Guest]: you created enough value for them. So yeah, building businesses is not a bad thing at
[Guest]: all, right? We make our entrepreneurs villains, basically.
[Guest]: And all that stuff, right? So we actually all grow up feeling that making money is a
[Guest]: bad thing somehow. So I think we need to celebrate our entrepreneurs more versus
[Guest]: probably the other people that we celebrate so much. And yeah, like you said, it's not
[Amit Varma]: a bad thing.
[Amit Varma]: I think like the frame that I look at it as a writer, John Stossel had once spoken of
[Amit Varma]: the double thank you moment. And when the, you know, the person hands you the coffee,
[Amit Varma]: you say, thank you. She says, thank you. Right. And what's happening here is that you value
[Amit Varma]: the coffee more than the money you paid for it. And the cafe values are money more than
[Amit Varma]: the coffee they gave you. So both are benefiting. And I think in India, image is bad because
[Amit Varma]: like double thank you moment, positive sum, free market, where the state with this power
[Amit Varma]: is ruling everything. And a lot of the people who are making money are not necessarily providing
[Amit Varma]: a service, but they're using the power of the state to take a monopoly in some area
[Amit Varma]: and so on and so forth. People have made money through undue advantages. So I think
[Amit Varma]: this is our legacy because definitely 70s, 80s, you know, when I was a kid in the 80s,
[Amit Varma]: this was the image. And to some extent, it's not like businessmen had a choice. They had
[Amit Varma]: to work within the system. And it was like that. But I think that image is changing slightly.
[Amit Varma]: My next question is, you know, what I'm sort of really impressed and moved by your answers
[Amit Varma]: is a self-reflective nature that you have not just sat back and thought a lot about
[Amit Varma]: the business and the things that you do. You've also sat back and thought a lot about
[Amit Varma]: yourself in the questions that you asked yourself and so on and so forth. And I remember
[Amit Varma]: reading this chapter on wiki feed in Snigdha Poonam's book Dreamers, where she speaks
[Amit Varma]: about how you have a plaster on your hand. And the reason you had that plaster on your
[Amit Varma]: hand is because you had gotten angry and punched the wall. Right. And I saw a talk on
[Amit Varma]: Twitter about the plaster on your hand since 2016. And I am like, one, of course, that
[Amit Varma]: anger is coming from a place of intense desire. And two, I'm sure you've also during
[Amit Varma]: this time, therefore, reflected on all of these aspects, figured out how to moderate
[Amit Varma]: that desire, figured out how to channel the anger. So take me through a little bit of
[Amit Varma]: your personal journey and the sort of growth that you've had in this period.
[Guest]: Oh, very interesting. Thank you that you actually went through so much and asked this
[Guest]: question. I was actually a very short tempered person, so to say. Right. And I have actually
[Guest]: thought about it a lot so much so that last, especially last three years, when the witty
[Guest]: feed situation happened, it changed me as a person a lot. Because it meant that I had
[Guest]: a lot of time to reflect, etc. I had almost a decade of being an entrepreneur in a certain
[Guest]: way. And then all of a sudden there was emptiness and I was able to think about what am I doing.
[Guest]: And I realized that it's actually very bad for me in a lot of different ways. And so
[Guest]: I made it as one of the reasons why I went to therapy. I've been doing therapy for the
[Guest]: last two and a half years, two and a half years now. And I also have an executive coach
[Guest]: which has helped. Actually, she was the one who helped me work through my anger first
[Guest]: and then therapy, of course, dug a little deeper, figured out where it comes from, etc.
[Guest]: During my reflection, what I realized was that apart from the fact that so my mom is
[Guest]: a very angry person and I grew up and her own. I had a very strained relationship because
[Guest]: of that with her. And then therapy again helped me reflect a lot on that and figure out why
[Guest]: was it and how it happened and why my mom was or is the way she is, etc. But I think
[Guest]: I probably inherited some of it from her. And then I made it my coping mechanism for
[Guest]: multiple things. One, for a lot of inferiority complex. I started this company when I was
[Guest]: 19. So was Sushant and Praveen was like 16 or younger. Basically, I didn't have a beard
[Guest]: at that time and I looked like a kid. Even now, I'm not like a very macho man type.
[Guest]: I'm a very sleek guy that way. So, if you go to ask someone for a job, they would not
[Guest]: give you the same kind of respect if a man in his 40s walks in and doesn't know shit,
[Guest]: but still will get the respect because he is big, basically, or whatever. Again, another
[Guest]: contradiction in our Indian society. So, I started keeping a beard. I used to keep,
[Guest]: now I actually keep a clean shave. Earlier, I used to keep a French shave that this man
[Guest]: should look good, basically. Then you want people to work for you. I was hiring people
[Guest]: when we were 20, 21, something like that. And again, growing up, one more thing, I mean,
[Guest]: we are taught that if you want someone to work for you, you have to be a little tough
[Guest]: and you have to be a little threatening. So, all of these things were there with me. Some
[Guest]: of the bad ones that I carried from my family and business that way. So, my way of establishing
[Guest]: my authority as a CEO on my team was through being very strict and tough. And I had a problem
[Guest]: of anger, but I would basically now justify it by saying that it is important, it is needed
[Guest]: for me to, and I did this for four, five, six years, probably more than that. I hope
[Guest]: some of them listen it now. I was thinking to write a letter to all my ex-employees at
[Guest]: Witty Feed. And I wanted to write an apology letter to all of them saying that it feels
[Guest]: like I was a very toxic boss because I used to get angry a lot. I don't believe I was
[Guest]: a bad boss to them actually, but that part of me was very toxic. I believe that we have
[Guest]: built Witty Feed with an amazing culture, cared about people, but there were two extremes
[Guest]: of me. And there is one side where I was, I would get so angry and the people would
[Guest]: be scared of talking to me. And the other side, which would be like extremely empathetic,
[Guest]: go 10 steps out of the way to do anything for those people that they need. Right. And
[Guest]: which is why so many people stuck with us even when we had nothing right then during
[Guest]: the Witty Feed thing. So it was justified for many years. Plus there is one more thing
[Guest]: that happens, see in your twenties you believe something. And I started a company, it was
[Guest]: such a busy thing to do, but I never had a chance to sit down and think about who am
[Guest]: I, what am I doing here? Right. Because I had gone through a very amazing journey of
[Guest]: building a company and I got married, which is another story and so much more. Right.
[Guest]: So your belief system changes, but not many of us realize that and realize the fact that
[Guest]: you need to sit down and reflect on it and think about it. Do I still believe that? Do
[Guest]: I still believe all of that? You may believe the same or it might have changed on the opposite
[Guest]: side, but you will only realize that when you will sit down and reflect on it. And that
[Guest]: awareness of reflection is something that was missing. And I was so busy. Right. End
[Guest]: of 2018 when this Witty Feed thing happened. And again, I'm very lucky for this one person
[Guest]: Harsh Bhaiya. Harsh Bhaiya just joined us. October 2018 he joined us, November 2018 the
[Guest]: Witty Feed thing happened. But he is the man that he is, so he decided to stick with us
[Guest]: and he said that we will make it together, whatever new journey you start, then I will
[Guest]: probably leave. But I am with you. And he is someone who is one of the most articulate
[Guest]: person. I had heard the word articulation from him for the first time in my life. So
[Guest]: I learned from him what articulation means. Most articulate person that you will meet
[Guest]: and like he has these deep thoughts, he'll ask you questions, he'll make you think about
[Guest]: things that you've never done that. And which is where finally when I got some time, I realized
[Guest]: that this anger is actually bad for everything. Like it's very toxic for the people who have
[Guest]: to face it because of me. More importantly, it is even more toxic to me, my mental health,
[Guest]: even my physical health. And I have no shame in saying it now because I thankfully worked
[Guest]: out through it, that I used to shout so much so that my stomach used to hurt. And I think
[Guest]: about it today and I'm like, why? Why did I do so much harm to myself? There's no reason.
[Guest]: But just that I wanted to ensure that, you know, I am the alpha in the room and there
[Guest]: is an authority. I am the CEO. I have 150 people to manage and I'm 23, 24. Like how
[Guest]: do you comprehend that? And there was so much inferiority complex inbuilt in me.
[Guest]: People who dress in a certain way, people who speak in a certain way, people who eat
[Guest]: certain kind of food. There was a lot of inferiority that I've been able to thankfully, I think,
[Guest]: work out and process in last few years, last three, four years, especially. And I'm so
[Guest]: happy that I'm actually a better person at the end of it now. But yeah, maybe this podcast
[Guest]: is the way to do it. I am really sorry for all those people who had to go through this
[Guest]: because of something that was truly just my internal stuff.
[Amit Varma]: No, when you say you're 31, you know, most people who are 31 or most people at any age
[Amit Varma]: don't really go through this period of self-reflection where they can, you know, talk about themselves
[Amit Varma]: in the way that they have. My other question is this, you know, sort of following on from
[Amit Varma]: what you've said about controlling your anger, that do you not feel angry anymore? Or do
[Amit Varma]: you still feel angry, but you immediately control it because you have the self-awareness?
[Guest]: I absolutely feel angry. There's no doubt about it. Right. But now I'm aware of it.
[Guest]: I can look at myself in third person. So the way I process through my anger is that my
[Guest]: therapy and my coach, they were able to help me look at myself, like time travel, basically
[Guest]: where when I'm about to get angry, 90% of the times I am able to see through five minutes
[Guest]: down the line. And what am I going to do? Literally, I can stand as a third person and
[Guest]: I'm looking at the entire scene. How am I behaving right now? And how am I going to
[Guest]: make the other person feel? And how am I? I am going to feel in five, ten minutes from
[Guest]: now. And I would feel terrible every time after getting angry by the way. Because like
[Guest]: I said, that the true self in me was in a very empathetic person. I would feel like
[Guest]: I shouted at him for no reason. I would almost every single time I would go and say sorry
[Guest]: to those people. And then you've done the damage you've done. Right. So I'm able to
[Guest]: visualize that now. Right. And so 90% of the time I'm like, what are you doing Vinay?
[Guest]: Do you want to feel like this? Do you want to make him feel or her feel like this? And
[Guest]: I realize there's a better way. And I literally repeat the sentence in my mind that if I'm
[Guest]: going to say something in a certain way to someone, I reiterate that sentence. And I'm
[Guest]: like, there's a better way of saying it. Like I say to someone, what have you done?
[Guest]: Versus, if you do it like this, it might be better. And I'm like, I'm able to somehow
[Guest]: do that, you know, thanks to my coach and my therapist, I'm able to do that. And that
[Guest]: is what basically avoids. So I don't think my anger went away, because that's who I am.
[Guest]: But I know how to work through it now. And I'm able to process it, basically.
[Amit Varma]: One of the concepts in philosophy, which had a big influence on me, and I think about it
[Amit Varma]: often, is Immanuel Kant's categorical imperative. And basically, what it says is that you should
[Amit Varma]: never treat other people as a means to an end, but as an end in themselves. Right. And
[Amit Varma]: sometimes, when I look at all of us, look at myself, look around at people, and I have
[Amit Varma]: to ask myself the question that, am I treating other people, even those who are close to
[Amit Varma]: me, closest to me, as a means to an end, that, you know, we all have a play in our heads,
[Amit Varma]: and we are the central character, and everyone else is a prop, right? So I consciously try
[Amit Varma]: to then make the effort that you step back, and you think of other people as people. And
[Amit Varma]: partly this plays to in conversation also, like one of the things that doing this long
[Amit Varma]: form show has taught me, is that just listen, like Stephen Covey once said that we don't
[Amit Varma]: listen to understand, we listen to respond. Or usme kya hai, usme poora ego hai. So I
[Amit Varma]: could be talking to you, but everything is about my ego, I am the central character,
[Amit Varma]: you are a prop who is there for my amusement. But then if you really listen, then you treat
[Amit Varma]: the other person as an end in themselves, then you're trying to learn from them, then
[Amit Varma]: it's not about your ego, then you're just taking it in. And I find that our default
[Amit Varma]: mode can sometimes be that aap main character ho, baaki sab, you know, it could be like
[Amit Varma]: baaki sab could, like this virtual reality, you know, it could be a similar thing, that
[Amit Varma]: you are playing a game and everybody else is a character in this virtual reality around
[Amit Varma]: you. And then you have to remind myself, and I thought of this, because, you know, when
[Amit Varma]: you were speaking, this sort of these moments of pause, when you get angry, and you ask
[Amit Varma]: yourself, should I say it like this? Or should I say it like that? What you are, I think
[Amit Varma]: doing immediately in that moment is converting that person from just a means to an end to
[Amit Varma]: an end in themselves, right? This person is a human being, I got to think about how they
[Amit Varma]: will feel, and which you would do anyway, like you said, because that empathy is also
[Amit Varma]: inbuilt. So, you know, and you've spoken earlier in other sort of talks and interviews, you
[Amit Varma]: give, I think a TEDx talk on this, which I'll link from the show notes, where you speak
[Amit Varma]: about the importance of people, you know, the importance of, you know, how you deal
[Amit Varma]: with people, how you manage people, all of that. So take me through your learnings in
[Amit Varma]: this, not just from the point of view of a manager with so many people working for you,
[Amit Varma]: but also from a personal point of view.
[Guest]: Yeah, before that, I remember one thing that you asked, do you still get angry, etc, right?
[Guest]: So, just yesterday, I lost myself with my father, we were having a discussion and I
[Guest]: was thinking about it when you were asking questions, that yesterday, it happened with
[Guest]: me. And so it happens even now, right? And again, I felt terrible, I wrote an apology
[Guest]: message before sleeping, etc. Basically, see people, I didn't know about the philosophy
[Guest]: that you said, but I think I look at people in a similar manner, like that's my articulation
[Guest]: of it also, that people are, people can never be a means to an end, no matter who they are.
[Guest]: Basically, if you try to, whoever you are talking to, whose life is also going to be
[Guest]: impacted by any of your actions, if you can walk into their shoes for those few seconds
[Guest]: and think about how is it going to feel if it were you, I think it changes your entire
[Guest]: perspective, right? So, like while building the company, we always, so customer is God,
[Guest]: right? But your people, those people are equally important. They are basically, they say that
[Guest]: if you can treat people better, that's probably the best worship of a God anyways, right?
[Guest]: So, if you treat your people properly, they will take care of your, they are the priest
[Guest]: whom you have assigned, the priest whom you have told to worship your God. And if you
[Guest]: take care of that priest, then that priest is also a God, who is going to do anything
[Guest]: for you, right? So, you have to anyways really be, you know, very, you have to be taking
[Guest]: care of your people. Those people are your company's employees, your relatives, your
[Guest]: family, your parents, your wife, anybody basically. So, you, I think we are nothing but a sum
[Guest]: of people that we earn in life. And at least in my understanding, every relationship has
[Guest]: to be earned. Whether it is with your parents, with your siblings, we get something in the
[Guest]: gift, but again, if we want to have them and build on them, we have to earn those relationships
[Guest]: as well. So, like we get our parents, we get our siblings, at least these 2-3 things we
[Guest]: get. But I think we should also earn over time, you know, you have to, and to earn,
[Guest]: everybody says you have to invest into relationships. You really have to invest in your people, right?
[Guest]: So, you have to do that, whoever it is, right? So, I tried, that is one of my modus operandi.
[Guest]: And I learned it while, I think, I think empathy was natural. I don't know where it came from.
[Guest]: My father is a very empathetic person, but he has other traits also. I'm not sure if
[Guest]: it came, it came from him, but it came from somewhere. There are a lot of things that
[Guest]: I keep wondering, where did it come from? You know, why am I the way I am? A lot of
[Guest]: times, because I don't see my surroundings, which would have led to this. I don't see
[Guest]: my parents or anybody in my family who would have impacted me to be that way. But anyways,
[Guest]: so when we were making the company, one of the philosophies that I built it on was that
[Guest]: if you share the company, what you're building, I didn't know about eShops back then. So,
[Guest]: I built it with absolute transparency. So, one of the things that I value most and is
[Guest]: the most critical thing in my understanding or to build relationships and value people
[Guest]: is you have to be very transparent. So, I built my companies with the utmost transparency.
[Guest]: I mean, we had a small team, a big team, a team of 150 people and a team of 5 people
[Guest]: in between. And plus now again, we are at about 30-35 people. Everybody knows everything
[Guest]: about the company. If you are working with us, you can call our accountant and ask him
[Guest]: the most secret questions and there is no secret there basically. You will know everything
[Guest]: by. If you trust me with your career, which is like one of the most important parts of
[Guest]: your life, then I need to trust you with the information that this company has, right?
[Guest]: And why should anything be hidden from you? At least, I still believe this. I don't know
[Guest]: what will happen when I grow up. Like you said, politics changes your character. I think
[Guest]: it happens in business too, when businesses grow up. But hopefully, we haven't gone there
[Guest]: yet, right? So, we should be able to maintain it till now. I built it with absolute transparency.
[Guest]: I tell them about the worst of the things in the company, what's going wrong, what's
[Guest]: going right. I basically speak very transparently to my people. Second, I think again, means
[Guest]: to an end, right? I don't remember. There are a lot of people, 3-4 people that I can
[Guest]: think of now, who still haven't returned that money, basically. So, I always felt that this
[Guest]: man needs 2-3 lakhs. I have more money in my account and this 3-4 lakhs is not going
[Guest]: to make a dent in this entire thing. But if he gets it, his life changes. If I don't give
[Guest]: it to him, he will go somewhere, take a loan. If he doesn't get a bank loan, he will do
[Guest]: something like this. He will unnecessarily become part of that monstrous interest rates
[Guest]: and will get stuck in a debt cycle. I used to think that the stress he will face in life
[Guest]: is better than the interest rate. If he doesn't get that much stress in his life, this guy
[Guest]: will be more productive. My way of justifying it as a business was that. But then, what
[Guest]: I felt was, okay, I had kept the money here, I needed it here, I used it, it's over, basically.
[Guest]: So, we used to do one of those things. If anyone in the company needs money, they get
[Guest]: basically whatever they need. Another philosophy outside the company or in the company I have
[Guest]: always followed with people is that, if you don't participate in someone's happiness,
[Guest]: it doesn't make much difference to anyone. If someone invites you to a wedding and you
[Guest]: don't go, the wedding won't stop. Nothing will happen. He will tell you that you didn't
[Guest]: come. But they are not going to really remember it or care about it too much. Except it's
[Guest]: like a really close friend or whatever, right? But if someone is in pain, like let's say
[Guest]: somebody has a family member pass away, and if you're not there at that point in time,
[Guest]: they are going to remember you for the rest of their life. He will remember. At least
[Guest]: I follow this. It doesn't matter if you're in my happiness or not. But if you're not
[Guest]: there at that point in time, he will remember. And so, then you should always be there for
[Guest]: people you care about when they are down, when the chips are down. Because that's when
[Guest]: everyone says that everyone salutes the rising sun, no one stands with you in sadness. So
[Guest]: someone has to be there to change it. If I say that, then I need to be with you when
[Guest]: your chips are down, right? So, I don't know, like when India and Australia are playing,
[Guest]: then I support India, of course. But when India is playing Bangladesh, then I support
[Guest]: Bangladesh by default. So, I feel that you need to stand with the weak or the people
[Guest]: who are in pain, basically. Right? So, I used to make this a point and I try to do this
[Guest]: even today. Once, one of my employees during the defeat days lost their grandmother. And
[Guest]: he used to live in the village, somewhere in front of Jabalpur, basically. It took me
[Guest]: some 20 hours to travel, by train he could travel. My phone got stolen for Rs. 75,000
[Guest]: to reach there and all, a new phone had come. But I felt very contentful going there. And
[Guest]: I think I made a lifelong relationship with that guy by doing that. He won't forget me
[Guest]: ever. I used to call him and say, Sonil, sorry, I feel very bad for you. Let me know if you
[Guest]: need anything. But then he, you know, I took the pain to go there and he will always remember
[Guest]: me. My point being that if you stand in pain, people will stand in your pain, basically.
[Guest]: You have no right to complain that people were not with you when chips are down, when
[Guest]: your chips were down. If you, before that, have not been with all those people when their
[Guest]: chips were down. Because there is no one who is doing everything well. Everyone's life
[Guest]: is bad, right? So that's another thing that I really follow a lot in life. Not your typical
[Guest]: management stuff, right? But I follow this also. What else?
[Amit Varma]: One interesting thing that you had mentioned in one of your interviews was, and this also
[Amit Varma]: struck me as very self-aware at the time, that, you know, you might have a hundred employees.
[Amit Varma]: So for you talking to one employee for a minute, it's just, oh, you have a hundred of them.
[Amit Varma]: But for that person, that person is one boss. And talking to you kind of makes a little
[Guest]: bit of work. Absolutely. It makes or breaks that day.
[Guest]: I mean, you have 150 people, you talked to them, you got busy later. You talked to him
[Guest]: in a weird voice, you talked to him in anger. His whole day was ruined. Because for him,
[Guest]: like you said, he has only one boss, right? So again, I mean, you treat people like people.
[Guest]: I think in simple language, in one sentence, the point is the same as you said. Treat people
[Guest]: like people. Don't treat them like objects. You can't look at people as employees. You
[Guest]: can't look at them as one number on a balance sheet or on an Excel sheet, basically. You
[Guest]: have to look at them as people. When you do that, I think the entire perspective changes.
[Amit Varma]: And you were mentioning that there are certain characteristics that you look back on and
[Amit Varma]: you wonder, where did this come from? How did I become like this? And like two of those
[Amit Varma]: elements, of course, are those two sides of the same coin, perhaps anger and empathy,
[Amit Varma]: which you mentioned, which are interesting to you. What else?
[Guest]: I don't care about money. My entire family does. I like to, within my family also, I
[Guest]: have a very large family. My father has four brothers and five sisters. My mother also
[Guest]: has four brothers and five sisters. It's a very big family. Especially on my father's
[Guest]: side. I come from Haryana, so it's a bit of a misogynistic family. So I have more influence
[Guest]: on father's side. I have two brothers older than my father. I mean, I have two uncles
[Guest]: and I have three cousins who are elder to me. But I still have like, I am positioned
[Guest]: in the family as sort of a pseudo leader of the house, larger family. And I think I have
[Guest]: kind of given that place to myself. I conducted myself in a way that it basically became mine,
[Guest]: right? I was very close to my grandfather. He was a very smart guy. He wanted, I am a
[Guest]: big fan of joint family and all that stuff. And I kind of carried that legacy with me.
[Guest]: So those leadership type qualities, I don't see any person in such a big family who has
[Guest]: those basic characteristics. It's a bit self-boosting, but I like to believe that I am a very selfless
[Guest]: person. I have achieved 70% of that at least. I mean, there are times when I become selfish,
[Guest]: but I like to believe. The 30 times when I am not, even after that, after a while, I
[Guest]: feel bad that I did something wrong. It was a very selfish thing to do and all. I don't
[Guest]: think I have a very selfless family. Not many people are like that. My mother had some of
[Guest]: it. She used to make so many things for everybody in the village.
[Guest]: Sometimes she used to make ladoos for them, sometimes she used to make a sweater for them.
[Guest]: But other than that, I mean, there is no such selfless type of family. They are very self-centered
[Guest]: type of people. Then there are a lot of things. I mean, I think many times that I feel very
[Guest]: out of the place in my own family. I don't know, I mean, I like to believe I am a very
[Guest]: liberal person by thoughts. I don't have a family which is very liberal by thoughts at
[Guest]: all. Right. I don't know, I don't remember. There are a lot of things. Like I said, sometimes
[Guest]: it happens that I feel out of the place. How was I born in this family? And I love all
[Guest]: of them. They are nice people. Of course, I ended up like this for some reason because
[Guest]: they were around me. Right. But how did I end up? I ended up with these guys. Right.
[Guest]: So there's an aspiration. Sorry. Sorry. Aspiration. Right. It's very important human trait.
[Guest]: Right. It's okay if I share that. Right. So, my family was married and other one was
[Guest]: about to get married or something. My grandfather was still there. He was very unhappy and like
[Guest]: very sad about it. And I made a presentation. I literally made a PowerPoint presentation.
[Guest]: I had a computer. I made a PowerPoint presentation. And basically all the men in the house, because
[Guest]: they are the ones who decide. I basically pulled all of them in one room. We are eight
[Guest]: cousins. All seven of us, we pulled all of them in one room and I presented a grand vision
[Guest]: of building the single group one day. I was like, you have heard of Ambarni, you have
[Guest]: heard of Birla, you have heard of all these names. But have you ever heard of a single
[Guest]: group? Have you heard of a big one? We will build it. Why don't four of you, eight of
[Guest]: us, twelve people, if we all do some businesses, like a very grand vision, all of that.
[Guest]: Let's talk about money. Everyone listens in our house. We can make thousands of crores.
[Guest]: We will build big businesses. We will do this, we will do that. They, of course, listened
[Guest]: to it. They calmed down. It didn't happen for a few days. It happened after six months.
[Guest]: But nobody cared about it later on. In my family, it's basically a useless thing that
[Guest]: I did at that point in time, basically. My cousin started a mobile shop in the village
[Guest]: after leaving studies at that time. My belief was that I will have to study if I want to
[Guest]: build a single group. Basically, I slept in the same room with him that night and I cried
[Guest]: the entire night because he left his education and started a shop. I was like, yaar ye to
[Guest]: kaise banayenge hum single group agar tum aise chhod doge to. Aise kaise hoga and all that
[Guest]: stuff, right? So which is how? Sometimes I feel out of the place in the family that I
[Amit Varma]: am. I love all of them. So you mentioned that you are a selfless person and I am not such
[Amit Varma]: a selfless person. But for the moment, I can see that I think both of us need a break.
[Amit Varma]: So let's be selfish, take a short break and come back after that.
[Amit Varma]: Well, that phase in my life ended for various reasons and now it is time to revive it. Only
[Amit Varma]: now, I am doing it through a newsletter. I have started the India Uncut newsletter at
[Amit Varma]: indiancut.substack.com where I will write regularly about whatever catches my fancy.
[Amit Varma]: I'll write about some of the themes I cover in this podcast and about much else. So please
[Amit Varma]: do head on over to indiancut.substack.com and subscribe. It is free. Once you sign up,
[Amit Varma]: each new installment that I write will land up in your email inbox. You don't need to
[Amit Varma]: go anywhere. So subscribe now for free. The India Uncut newsletter at indiancut.substack.com.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back to the scene in the unseen. I'm chatting with Vinay Singhal and we've had
[Amit Varma]: our little selfish break. Now it's time to just open up and sort of have a conversation
[Amit Varma]: again. And tell me now about, you know, that part of the journey, which eventually ends
[Amit Varma]: up in WittyFeed. Like you've, you know, we've gone with you to college and that sort of
[Amit Varma]: that change has been happening. You've started your little NGO. You've started this little
[Amit Varma]: site business making websites. Then eventually, how did you sort of gravitate towards WittyFeed
[Guest]: happening?
[Guest]: Yeah. So like I told you, the journey started with that NGO and the idea of funding that
[Guest]: NGO. We were seven people when we started it, which is how the first, the name of our
[Guest]: legal entity also came up. The company was called Vatsana Technologies and Vatsana also
[Guest]: it's a Thai word, which means trust actually. And that's how we ended up like adopting the
[Guest]: name. It's initial of everybody's name, all seven people's name, essentially. So we started
[Guest]: to make websites, software for people. Literally we used to make websites for people for 500
[Guest]: rupees. All your packer movers, all your property guys and all. And this is what 2010, 11, those
[Guest]: years, right? So website was a cool thing, basically. And this was a time when here in
[Guest]: Karol Bagh or somewhere I used to go to ask people for work, essentially. When I used
[Guest]: to get clients from Chennai, we would get some clients and time when people will not
[Guest]: take us seriously. Basically, what will we do? We will run away with the money or whatever,
[Guest]: basically all that stuff, right? After, since Badlega Bharat Mein, we didn't know, like
[Guest]: when I look back at it now, now we know that it was a content thing at the end of the day.
[Guest]: We were writing a lot of content, etc. We had got a taste of it. Facebook happened basically
[Guest]: around that time to us. And Purveen actually started a Facebook page, which was called
[Guest]: amazing things in the world. And the idea was very simple. The idea was that we were
[Guest]: just sitting and talking like this. Why is everything so negative in the world? Look
[Guest]: at everything in the media, social media, you know, all your electronic media, look
[Guest]: at Facebook, look at new channels, everyone looks at them like the world is going to end
[Guest]: now, everything is going bad in the world. Whereas the world definitely has more good
[Guest]: than bad, right? And that thought led us to sort of a brainstorming overnight thinking
[Guest]: that what we realized was that negative is naturally viral because we are genetically
[Guest]: prepared to spread bad news. Because see, our animal instincts say that the moment I
[Guest]: see danger, the moment I see something bad, I'm supposed to warn everybody else of my
[Guest]: kind. That is what virality is. So today's all these viral mechanisms, those clickbait
[Guest]: sites like one we had, what people essentially do is they take sensational stuff, package
[Guest]: it with fear. And so you share it very fast, which is why WhatsApp University and all these
[Guest]: clips and all of those things work so fast, right? So we realized which means there is
[Guest]: definitely more good in the world and there is more good in the world than bad. And so
[Guest]: can we create something that appreciates the good in the world? So we started a community
[Guest]: which was basically just for that. And it was called amazing things in the world. The
[Guest]: Facebook page was called amazing things in the world. Exactly what it, it did exactly
[Guest]: what it said, that we would, again, we're not content people by education, right?
[Guest]: No one has done any journalism or mass communication and all that stuff, right? So we were engineers
[Guest]: and we were all just figuring it out from a very common sense point of view. It makes
[Guest]: sense, there should be more good. And at that time, frankly speaking, we still don't know,
[Guest]: I mean, this was, this happened in 2012. We still don't know that we are making something
[Guest]: of content or making a content company. In our minds, we just want to do something good
[Guest]: in life, so let's do something like that. So we started this community. The idea was
[Guest]: simple. We would curate, you know, content from everywhere on the internet and put it
[Guest]: on this Facebook page. We didn't create any new content. We did curation basically. The
[Guest]: idea went viral. The people, people responded. It seems like what worked in our favor was
[Guest]: one was consistency. And going back to what my father taught, that shop is my temple,
[Guest]: customer is my God. If you are doing this, then do it with genuine honesty. I mean, consistently
[Guest]: we like one post every hour, meaning one post every hour, no matter what. We used to bring
[Guest]: so much content from anywhere. And customer is my God, meaning that we would get at peak,
[Guest]: I think, some thousand messages every day. Some people would come with requests, some
[Guest]: people would come with, you know, suggestions, advice, criticism, whatever, basically. We
[Guest]: used to reply to those messages in 24 hours. We would just sit down and reply to those
[Guest]: messages. And this is when we had no idea what would happen. Why are we doing this?
[Guest]: What will happen to this Facebook page, basically, at the end of the day, right? But we were
[Guest]: doing it very religiously, you know. And I think that paid off. The community became
[Guest]: very huge. Within the first six months, we had about a million followers. And this is
[Guest]: all organic. Back in the day, in 2012, Facebook, Boost, Post, all this was not there. Organic
[Guest]: was a thing. And I think we also got lucky, right place at the right time. Facebook was
[Guest]: promoting pages as a thing. And organic reach was at its peak. And we just happened to create
[Guest]: a Facebook page with a unique thing, basically, back in the day. If you remember, at that
[Guest]: time, there was a very viral page called I Love Science. Its goodies were also sold and
[Guest]: all that stuff, right? So we were one of those, we were pages of that category, at the same
[Guest]: level. And primarily in the US. And so that Facebook page was our introduction to the
[Guest]: world of content. At that time, we realized for the first time that we are a content company,
[Guest]: a media company, we are talking about everything. Around the same time, in the first two years,
[Guest]: we did not even know that this is a start-up. This is called a start-up. And what are investors,
[Guest]: what are VCs? Frankly speaking, for the longest time, I did not understand why would somebody
[Guest]: give you money when you are a loss-making company and all that stuff, right? Flipkart
[Guest]: news, at that time, in 2010-11, Flipkart itself was big, basically. News used to hear about
[Guest]: a loss of 5,000 crores, a loss of 4,000 crores, and it is also getting funding, 1 billion,
[Guest]: 2 billion, etc. So my Marwadi mind used to ask me, and my father used to tell me that
[Guest]: business is a function of wealth creation, in his own words. He used to say that. Here
[Guest]: this story is going on, there are losses, people are giving money, what is this story?
[Guest]: Basically, I had no idea how VC works, etc. So in the next 2-3 years, I understood that
[Guest]: we are building a start-up, why investors invest, how does this entire thing work. Then
[Guest]: we also realized that we are building a media company, content company, what does that mean?
[Guest]: And what are the ways to make money in media? One of the earliest things that you realize
[Guest]: is that you make money from ads, basically. You set up a blog, drive traffic, make money,
[Guest]: right? So we did that. The first website that we made was called thestupidstation.com.
[Amit Varma]: Nice name, man.
[Guest]: I thought so, at least, when we started it, that TSS, thestupidstation.com, that it's
[Guest]: a place of amazing stuff. Amazing people are stupid, basically, is what I believe. So,
[Guest]: okay, you'll all come here. It's a place where you discover things which are unbelievable
[Guest]: sort of stuff and all. And it was a unique name. The idea was, my understanding is a
[Guest]: name should be so unique that it sticks with you. That's the function of it, basically.
[Guest]: The work of the brand is not that much. It was definitely unique enough to stick, right?
[Guest]: So we started, we set up a website and we would basically, whatever stories we posted
[Guest]: on the website, we would write their detailed version on the website, essentially. So here
[Guest]: we started creating some actual content. We started to write stuff of our own. And the
[Guest]: idea would be that out of 24 posts a day, probably some 15 would still be on Facebook
[Guest]: and 8-10 of them will be on the website and we'll post a link and drive the traffic. Crazy
[Guest]: traffic. There was no limit to the organic reach at that time. It was amazing work. I
[Guest]: mean, 20-30 million traffic. I mean, 10 million when we hit it for the first time. And we
[Guest]: would go to all these Chennai meetups, founder meetups. We used to meet entrepreneurs. We
[Guest]: used to tell them that we have 10 million traffic on our website. We are college students.
[Guest]: People were like crazy. 10 million. How can that even happen? How is that even true?
[Guest]: They ask us for a screenshot of our analytics. Show us a screenshot of Google Analytics.
[Guest]: Another thing, most of our life, people have not believed what we have done because it
[Guest]: was so unbelievable at least. I look back and I was like, we used to do a lot of crazy
[Guest]: work at that time. 10 million, and this is 2013. 10 million traffic in India, I mean,
[Guest]: it was crazy. 10 million, flip card traffic, probably 10-20 million at that time. And 30-40
[Guest]: million page views a month, 10 million traffic. And it was all free. We had created a community
[Guest]: and it was coming from there. We would monetize through Google Ads. And so in May 2013, Shashank
[Guest]: and I passed out of college. In 2014, Praveen passed out. And when we passed out in 2013,
[Guest]: we used to make 20-25 lakh rupees a month. And this was basically free money. Right?
[Guest]: So, we, and you're like 22-23, you have so much money, 25 lakhs, my family must have
[Guest]: seen Sahid once. Basically, my father would tell us that we are not doing anything wrong
[Guest]: because 25 lakhs a month is a lot of money, right? So we did all that, it was quite amazing.
[Guest]: So from here, our journey of content started. We learned two very important lessons out
[Guest]: of this. Number one, which I have spoken about actually, during our earlier questions, which
[Guest]: is that, number one, that there is nothing more powerful than content as a medium of
[Guest]: mass influence. We understood this very clearly from here. Because look, we were a bunch of
[Guest]: college kids sitting out of a dormitory in Chennai. And we were here, a Facebook page
[Guest]: where we were making friends in the US, UK, Canada, Australia, New Zealand, all over Europe.
[Guest]: And these were people, there was a mother who would message us saying that your page
[Guest]: is like a bedtime story to my kids. Because it was all positive stuff, right? And basically
[Guest]: she was like, you know, your page makes my kids believe that it's a really nice world
[Guest]: out there, you know, believe in the good of the world, basically. We didn't sign up to
[Guest]: do this, basically, to be honest. We didn't start with that in mind. There was a teacher
[Guest]: in New Zealand whose message was that I teach 5th grade students and I start my class with
[Guest]: your page, right? There was this girl, it became too much to handle when there was this
[Guest]: girl who messaged us saying that you saved my life. We were like, what happened, you
[Guest]: messaged us? She was a content creator, I think. She was in suspense. She wrote, you
[Guest]: saved my life, thank you, you saved my life and left the message. Like, what happened?
[Guest]: And then she told us the entire story. She had lost her father recently. And then she
[Guest]: basically, she went into a depression. She was admitted to a hospital, so much so, and
[Guest]: she was suicidal. And one of these days, she was just scrolling through Facebook. So, a
[Guest]: post from our page landed into her feed through some friend or something. She went to our
[Guest]: page and kept on, like, down the rabbit hole, but she kept on scrolling for hours and hours
[Guest]: and hours. And then she was like, your page made me believe that there is so much good
[Guest]: out there in the world that I'm missing out on. And now I'm going on a world tour. And
[Guest]: I'm all out of depression, all that stuff, you know, like, what the hell? It's too much,
[Guest]: right? Again, 23-year-olds, how do you handle all of that stuff? Which is when we realized
[Guest]: that content is not a medium to create mass influence. In the world, we had six, that
[Guest]: community grew to about six million, let it speak. Six million people, through that,
[Guest]: it was at least 40-50 million, even more than that at peak, probably. We reach so many people
[Guest]: every month, which is humongous, right? I will do anything, but reaching 50 million
[Guest]: people is not a joke, right? So, that was the first belief. Second belief that we understood
[Guest]: from there was that if content is king, distribution is God. The real power is distribution, because
[Guest]: we also realized that none of these stories, none of these content pieces were something
[Guest]: that did not exist before we existed. All these nice places, nice people, nice inventions
[Guest]: that we talked about. All we did was we brought them and we created a distribution mechanism
[Guest]: through this community that it can reach to so many people, right? And so, the real power
[Guest]: was in distribution itself, right? So, you can write an amazing book, you can create
[Guest]: a great movie, but if nobody reads it, nobody watches it, what's the point basically, right?
[Guest]: It is then made for libraries. And so, our second belief from there became very strong
[Guest]: that the real power is in distribution. And that is what then finally in 2014, when we
[Guest]: figured out what to do, which is what led us to starting WittyFeed. WittyFeed, in the
[Guest]: front of it, it was like a viral content site, basically pretty much like that. But in the
[Guest]: back end, we actually solved the distribution. So, the unique thing that we did, the real
[Guest]: secret source of WittyFeed was the distribution. Again, we were not people of content. I am
[Guest]: saying this again and again that content was not our forte. So, what we did, he said, if
[Guest]: one Facebook page can do so much, and if all the Facebook pages of the world are combined
[Guest]: and their distribution is combined, then you can build a very, very large influence basically.
[Guest]: And on the other hand, there was no way to make money through Facebook pages. So, again,
[Guest]: social good and a way to make money, right? So, we figured it out. We set up a website,
[Guest]: we set up a Google ad, drive traffic on it, manage its entire server infrastructure. So,
[Guest]: we were like, if you can provide this as a service to people, you know, there is no way
[Guest]: to make money through Facebook pages today. People have millions and millions of followers,
[Guest]: but they don't know how to make money out of it. And not everybody knows how to set
[Guest]: up a website, then regularly create content on it, figure out Google ads, people just
[Guest]: don't know all of that shit, right? So, we said, let's do this. So, we created
[Guest]: world's first ever content affiliate network back in the day. If you have a social community,
[Guest]: join us. You have access to all content of WittyFeed, you share it with your people and
[Guest]: whatever traffic you will drive back to our website, we will basically do a revenue share
[Guest]: with you. So, this was a very unique idea at that time. And the idea went viral. Over
[Guest]: the next four years, we had 65,000 such influencers working with us across the world. And we scaled
[Guest]: to about 120 million uniques month on month on the website. It was a bootstrap company.
[Guest]: Again, back in the day, we were doing... So, we shifted to Indore in 2014. And we started
[Guest]: this company in September 2014. So, we were doing everything that most, that was basically
[Guest]: things that the startup world believed that couldn't be done at that point in time. Building
[Guest]: from tier 2, bootstrapped, revenue, profitable, and global from India. This is like every
[Guest]: notion of startups that people thought that this can't be done from India basically. At
[Guest]: peak of about 40 crores annual revenue, we became the third largest media balance sheet
[Guest]: in India back in the day, digital media balance sheet. Times Internet, HD and then us. Because
[Guest]: no one made revenue of 40 crores at that time. Digital didn't make that much money. We used
[Guest]: to tell people 100 million traffic here. So, people used to say, what are you talking about?
[Guest]: There must be some scam from Indore, there must be some scam, there must be a lot of
[Guest]: traffic, 100 million. Does it happen? There are not 100 million users in India right now.
[Guest]: But they wouldn't realize that out of 100, 50, 60 million was, out of 120, 60 million
[Guest]: was from US alone. And when you told them that, it became even more unbelievable. How
[Guest]: do you create content for US from Indore and all that stuff. But yeah, so that's how we
[Guest]: landed at WittyFeed and then it became a story of its own.
[Amit Varma]: So, tell me a bit about how you arrived at your content philosophy in terms of figuring
[Amit Varma]: out what works. Like a lot of you are from Sringda's book, I looked at some of your headlines
[Amit Varma]: from that day and like one of them is, why your best friend is your true love, just like
[Amit Varma]: Mila Kunis and Ashton Kutcher. And then this is what you want to know about Amanda, Justin
[Amit Varma]: Bieber's new girlfriend, and so on and so forth. So, how did you sort of arrive at the
[Amit Varma]: triggers and the hooks which really work in terms of content? And looking back on it now,
[Amit Varma]: or even thinking about it back then, because you obviously, as soon as you figured out
[Amit Varma]: the triggers, you figured out the deeper question, which is what does it reveal about us? What
[Amit Varma]: does it reveal about human beings that a certain set of things draw our attention and make
[Amit Varma]: us click and other things don't?
[Guest]: Yeah, so I actually used to give a presentation on this. Virality, I believe, is more science
[Guest]: less art. Tukka nahi hota hai basically virality, right? You can actually plan it pretty much.
[Guest]: Ab to chalo most people do that, usse time pe itna wo nahi hota tha. There are three
[Guest]: elements to it. There is a title. And this is again back in the days when text content
[Guest]: articles were the way to consume most of the content, right? So there's a title, there's
[Guest]: a thumbnail, and then there is distribution, basically that how do you distribute it, right?
[Guest]: So title and thumbnail are pretty much like a trailer of a movie, right? So they give
[Guest]: you that your title and thumbnail of a story has to be good enough. It tells you enough
[Guest]: to generate a curiosity that it should want to make you click. So title aur thumbnail
[Guest]: ka kaam hota hai clickability drive karna. So clickability is the number one masala in
[Guest]: the recipe basically of virality. So title and thumbnail leads to clickability of it.
[Guest]: So it generates enough curiosity that you want to click on it, but doesn't tell you
[Guest]: everything so that you're not interested anymore, basically, right? The second one is shareability.
[Guest]: That is the job of the content inside, right? So people share stuff when it makes you feel
[Guest]: something. And it can be good, bad, anger, happiness, whatever, basically, but it has
[Guest]: to generate an emotion. That is when you will share it, you will comment on it. It has to
[Guest]: trigger you basically. It has to speak to you in some way. So relatability of the content
[Guest]: is very, very important, which basically leads to shareability over time. So more people
[Guest]: share it, more people see it. So more people click on it. And so it's a virtuous cycle
[Guest]: basically that way, right? But for this entire thing to work, there is a threshold distribution
[Guest]: that has to happen. And which is what we correct through the platform that we built. It was
[Guest]: called Viral 9, by the way, Viral 9 as a number. So Viral 9 was our way to jumpstart and give
[Guest]: the threshold distribution to a particular story. And then it basically, then it took
[Guest]: off from there, essentially, right? So clickability, shareability, and then distribution, threshold
[Guest]: distribution. Those are the three elements to making it viral. What worked as a content
[Guest]: basically? People want to know about other people. Basically, we are creepily very interested
[Guest]: into what other people are doing in their lives, etc. Right? So celebrity stuff would
[Guest]: work amazingly well. Humor is a evergreen content basically. So again, there's so much
[Guest]: bad out there at all times. When something that lightens your mood and something that
[Guest]: cheers you up, pops up in your feed, you will mostly click on it and you will go and see
[Guest]: what is there and all, right? And then the specialty that we built was, like I said,
[Guest]: we tried to remain on the positive side of the content all the time. Like at least, if
[Guest]: it is not positive, then this content should not be negative. Our underlining agenda was
[Guest]: that I used to say that every interaction of a content that we generate with people
[Guest]: out there, imagine it as a smile. So this exercise will sound almost like a cult building.
[Guest]: But when we used to do morning stand-ups, I would basically ask my entire team to close
[Guest]: their eyes and tell them that, like, imagine every click that a user is doing on your content.
[Guest]: Every time your content pops up in their feed and they click on it, they like it, they share
[Guest]: it, they comment on it, they land on our website and then they scroll through the page. Every
[Guest]: single instance is a smile that you are leaving out there, a positive energy that you are
[Guest]: leaving out there in the world. And that is why you work, like that is the work that you
[Guest]: are doing here. That was my way of basically helping my team find a purpose in whatever
[Guest]: we were doing basically. So purpose was to generate more smiles out there. And so we
[Guest]: tried to remain on the positive side of the content. I would not make the mistake of saying
[Guest]: that our 100% content was like this. I am sure it was a team of 70 people. In order
[Guest]: to generate traffic, they must have made something that would be negative as well. But we tried
[Guest]: to remain on the positive side of it. So like photography, I mean, like photography and
[Guest]: travel used to get mixed a lot, 10 places to travel and like amazing pictures. People
[Guest]: loved that. People used to love that with us. Because everything started from there
[Guest]: originally. Amazing people stories, you know, stories of underdogs, people winning, you
[Guest]: know, and good winning over bad. We used to do a lot of such viral content. You remember
[Guest]: there was a website back in the day, parallel to us called Upworthy. So we actually would
[Guest]: have a lot of similar, we were all of the same category, you know, BuzzFeed, Upworthy,
[Guest]: WittyFeed, Dipply, little things. All of us were in the same category of that, which is
[Guest]: why all of us are dead now. So same, same usse basically sab belong karte the sense
[Guest]: similar type of content is what we would create. So negative works, but we had to figure out
[Guest]: beyond negative and which is where we figured out that compassion works, you know, celebrity
[Guest]: works, humor works, history works. History was another very big thing for us by the way.
[Guest]: If you show historical photographs to people, it was a very viral content.
[Guest]: You know, 10 pictures from India from 1857 for example.
[Guest]: It's a viral article. If you make it today, it will work even today.
[Guest]: I know this forever. There is a lot of curiosity in these articles.
[Guest]: How did India look like? How were the people at that time?
[Guest]: So we will want to see that basically.
[Guest]: It was mostly pictorial content. So it used to work.
[Amit Varma]: Amazing. One negative headline of yours which I found was,
[Amit Varma]: how your face would look if you survived a car crash.
[Amit Varma]: And I can imagine this would have been pictorial also.
[Amit Varma]: I'm going to actually go and look for this because I'm very curious now
[Amit Varma]: that how would your face look if you survived a car crash.
[Amit Varma]: The other very interesting thing I find about this is that you are creating content
[Amit Varma]: which is going madly viral in the United States most of all
[Amit Varma]: where the culture is completely different.
[Amit Varma]: American pop culture is completely different there.
[Amit Varma]: Everything is completely different.
[Amit Varma]: You know, little things like how people romance, how people date, how people...
[Amit Varma]: Everything is different. Right? And you have a bunch of young kids in indoor.
[Amit Varma]: And they have to get inside the minds of the American public as it were
[Amit Varma]: and figure out what works, what doesn't work, all of that.
[Amit Varma]: So how was this process? Was it a process of kind of discovering universal hooks
[Amit Varma]: that these are things that everyone is interested in?
[Amit Varma]: Or was it a case of also doing trial and error where you figure out
[Amit Varma]: some things don't work and therefore the other things work?
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, when you're writing pieces like which might have dating advice
[Amit Varma]: or why your best friend is your true love,
[Amit Varma]: then, you know, how do these young people who are from indoor,
[Amit Varma]: how are they able to sort of do something that actually works with an American audience?
[Guest]: So two, three things. One, it was a mix of all of this basically.
[Guest]: So, of course, we try to keep a lot of our content global
[Guest]: because it was not just Americans which were our audience.
[Guest]: So Canada, UK, Australia, New Zealand and all these are very different cultures.
[Guest]: So they're not like... not very similar in nature apart from the fact that they speak English.
[Guest]: So we would try to keep a lot of our content global in nature, etc.
[Guest]: And advice, etc. global in nature.
[Guest]: But having said that, all our team was...
[Guest]: Ek toh, we would ask them to watch all American sitcoms,
[Guest]: all American serials, understand the cultural nuances,
[Guest]: the way people talk, what they say, etc.
[Guest]: So that's how we would do it.
[Guest]: Second, we would use a lot of data.
[Guest]: So basically, being engineers came into play there, right?
[Guest]: That all three, all between the three founders, two of us were engineers.
[Guest]: So we knew that...
[Guest]: And the guy who runs content was not the engineer in our case, right?
[Guest]: So Shashank is an engineer, he's a CTO.
[Guest]: I was the engineer and Praveen, who is not the engineer, was the content guy among us.
[Guest]: So it was a very complimentary skill set there.
[Guest]: And we would have a lot of data in terms of what stories work, what don't.
[Guest]: In which story does the user read up to, where does it drop, why is it dropping.
[Guest]: A lot of such insights we would essentially use.
[Guest]: And all of this data would go back to our team and...
[Guest]: Again, like I said, virality is less gut, more science.
[Guest]: And so we would use that data to plan,
[Guest]: that okay, this story is going on, so let's make more of these type of stories, etc.
[Guest]: We did... Whatever is written in this, it must be correct, so it's going on, basically.
[Guest]: So how do we mimic more of these and also...
[Guest]: Actually, a lot of content used to be of a similar type.
[Guest]: Because once it goes on, you want to repeat that as a business at the end of the day, right?
[Guest]: So we would do that.
[Guest]: Secondly, it was my underlining agenda, basically.
[Guest]: And my patriotic side came into play there.
[Guest]: And also, I always felt that West has some unnecessary and undue influence
[Guest]: on how the rest of the world's media works, basically, right?
[Guest]: You can call it our colonial baggage, or you can call it racism.
[Guest]: Whites are smart, blacks are not, right?
[Guest]: And all of that, basically.
[Guest]: And these guys are genuinely great storytellers.
[Guest]: So they have made it like that.
[Guest]: For some reason, US is the power center of the world.
[Guest]: At least the entire world believes that, even if it's not, right?
[Guest]: So I wanted a flavor of Indian or Asian thing going to the world.
[Guest]: I mean, we always consume them, right?
[Guest]: Why can't we create media in India and the world should consume it, right?
[Guest]: So actually, I used to consciously tell my team,
[Guest]: yes, we want to be relevant.
[Guest]: Our audience is Americans.
[Guest]: We want to be relevant to them.
[Guest]: But I don't want you to lose the fact that you are Indians
[Guest]: or writing it for them, basically.
[Guest]: So I want you to preserve that and so have a taste of that always,
[Guest]: you know, when you're giving some advice or writing any piece of article, etc, right?
[Guest]: I remember an anecdote.
[Guest]: Late Siri Gatilbihari Vajpayee ji passed away, right?
[Guest]: And so I told my team that we should definitely do a front page story.
[Guest]: It should be a story and it should be a homepage story,
[Guest]: definitely on our website, etc.
[Guest]: So my team, my editorial, of course, disagreed with it.
[Guest]: They said, it's not relevant.
[Guest]: Our audience is US.
[Guest]: What difference does it make to them?
[Guest]: I said, tell me something.
[Guest]: If an American leader passes away, let's say Obama, for example, or whatever, whoever,
[Guest]: would every Indian publication do a story on them and would it feature on homepage or not?
[Guest]: And of course, we are America's leader.
[Guest]: In the same way, this is an important country in the world.
[Guest]: We are one of the more powerful country and like,
[Guest]: it represents seventh of the population of the world or more than that, actually.
[Guest]: So why do you think that the leader of these people passed away
[Guest]: and it is not relevant for the world?
[Guest]: If you don't feel so, the world is never going to feel it, right?
[Guest]: So we used to add such flavors in between.
[Guest]: I don't, again, I might be thinking wrong here.
[Guest]: There's no right and wrong, I think.
[Guest]: It was just my perspective, my opinion, my way of bringing an Indian flavor to the world.
[Guest]: Like, why should world not have an Indian flavor of content, etc.
[Guest]: They used to do all of it.
[Guest]: There was a lot of trial and error.
[Guest]: Some content used to work, some didn't.
[Guest]: We were like a content factory.
[Guest]: 70 people writing more than 100 new articles every day.
[Guest]: Thankfully, we had to write less text because it was pictorial content.
[Guest]: But still, it's a lot.
[Guest]: So when you are producing in such a mass,
[Guest]: if we had 10 stories on any given day, that was a lot.
[Guest]: Then every influencer, all these 65,000 would share the same story.
[Guest]: They go big, we get our traffic, it's all good, right?
[Guest]: So more of them didn't work, less of them worked,
[Guest]: but the ones who worked gave us all the traffic that we needed.
[Guest]: That's how, basically, we built it.
[Amit Varma]: I think that point you made about wanting to push Indian content out there
[Amit Varma]: is really interesting because I think like the argument your guys would have made against it,
[Amit Varma]: it's about supply and demand.
[Amit Varma]: There is no demand from there.
[Amit Varma]: Here, we will do Obama because there is demand.
[Amit Varma]: And there is a perception that there is demand, but it's not there.
[Amit Varma]: But the counterpoint to that is that you can change the demand with supply.
[Guest]: Absolutely.
[Guest]: My point was that if that story is not visible in front of the audience,
[Guest]: then how will they consume it?
[Guest]: You put it, maybe it will not work.
[Guest]: Maybe your typical story does 100k users.
[Guest]: This one will do 10,000.
[Guest]: But that's okay, right?
[Guest]: 10,000 have read that narrative.
[Guest]: And so that will make an impact.
[Guest]: So you don't have to go big every time.
[Guest]: Those small, small changes would lead to some large impact over time.
[Guest]: So that's exactly the point I made.
[Guest]: And maybe I was the CEO, that is why I won.
[Guest]: Or maybe the point won it, but I got the story.
[Amit Varma]: I got the story on the homepage for a day.
[Amit Varma]: And there's another interesting angle here,
[Amit Varma]: with which I'll lead to my next observation and question,
[Amit Varma]: which is that, like you said,
[Amit Varma]: if a regular story gets 100,000 and this gets 10,000,
[Amit Varma]: the point is that these 10,000 are more engaged than those other 100,000
[Amit Varma]: because these people clicked on it in the first place
[Amit Varma]: because they are interested or they are that curious
[Amit Varma]: and they're finding out.
[Amit Varma]: Whereas in the 100,000,
[Amit Varma]: there'll be a lot of people who just kind of skim the content.
[Amit Varma]: And I have recently sort of been trying to think about media
[Amit Varma]: and the creator economy.
[Amit Varma]: And the frame that I use is something like earlier,
[Amit Varma]: we were talking about thin desires and thick desires.
[Amit Varma]: And the frame that I use for this is thick engagement and thin engagement.
[Amit Varma]: Like I keep telling people that I would rather have
[Amit Varma]: a 100,000 people listen to one of my episodes
[Amit Varma]: than do a 10-minute video and get 20 million views for it.
[Amit Varma]: And the reason for that is at 20 million views,
[Amit Varma]: the engagement will be thin,
[Amit Varma]: that, you know, people will drop off at 15 seconds,
[Amit Varma]: drop off at 20 seconds.
[Amit Varma]: But here my average session time is 40 minutes plus
[Amit Varma]: and here the engagement is much deeper.
[Amit Varma]: I hear from my listeners.
[Amit Varma]: I am, you know, and in very tangible ways,
[Amit Varma]: I understand how thick the engagement is.
[Amit Varma]: And the thing is that this is not something
[Amit Varma]: like when advertisers or sponsors think about your business.
[Amit Varma]: They think in those absolute numbers.
[Amit Varma]: That 20 million is way more impressive than a 100,000 or whatever.
[Amit Varma]: But actually the value of that thick engagement to me
[Amit Varma]: is like way greater, right?
[Amit Varma]: So in your business, is that also something that
[Amit Varma]: you sort of thought about?
[Amit Varma]: Like you've already said that you could see
[Amit Varma]: which article people are reading to what extent,
[Amit Varma]: you know, which is also an element of how much engagement there is.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I guess how many times they are sharing is an example
[Amit Varma]: because that obviously indicates.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me your sort of learnings with regard to different levels of engagement
[Amit Varma]: and not like, you know, people speak of clickbait disparagingly
[Amit Varma]: that you made a person click, but the main process really starts after that
[Amit Varma]: that how engaged are they?
[Amit Varma]: Are they going to come back?
[Guest]: Are they going to share?
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: So what are your learnings on that?
[Guest]: Yeah, so yeah, like I think what you said at the end of it
[Guest]: is probably the answer of it also.
[Guest]: That you can make somebody click on it by doing a clickbait article,
[Guest]: a clickbait title and thumbnail,
[Guest]: but you can't make them stay on your website
[Guest]: if you don't really have a meat, you know,
[Guest]: in the content that you are writing.
[Guest]: So which is why the stuff that you write has to be really really solid, right?
[Guest]: And that's why we used to do lengthy type of stories.
[Guest]: There's a business sense also in it, by the way.
[Guest]: What happens is that the amount of effort it takes to bring the users
[Guest]: to consume a piece of content is the same,
[Guest]: whether it's 10 minutes or 10 hours.
[Guest]: The amount of effort is the same to bring the user there, right?
[Guest]: After that, whether they watch it for 10 minutes or 10 hours,
[Guest]: that depends on your quality of content, right?
[Guest]: So you're actually better off creating a very high quality content
[Guest]: and make the same effort to bring the user there
[Guest]: and then engaging them for a long time, right?
[Guest]: So it actually makes a lot more business sense
[Guest]: to create very high quality content
[Guest]: and keep them engaged for a long long time, right?
[Guest]: So we used to try, like we had a lot of stories in which
[Guest]: there were like 100 things, right?
[Guest]: It used to go up and down, right?
[Guest]: And it makes business sense also because the deeper you go,
[Guest]: the more ads I can show and the more money I can make
[Guest]: probably out of this back in the day, right?
[Guest]: So yeah, we used to, I mean, it was the trade of the business
[Guest]: that the more engaging content you make, the more money you make.
[Guest]: I'm probably not getting the question deeper in terms of
[Guest]: what do you want to know, like how do you create engaging content, is it?
[Amit Varma]: Not just how you create engaging content,
[Amit Varma]: but for example, you spoke about how this girl wrote to you
[Guest]: and she said, you know, you saved her life.
[Amit Varma]: And obviously, she engaged with your content at a very deep level.
[Unknown]: It meant something to her, right?
[Amit Varma]: At the same time, you could create a content which is like,
[Amit Varma]: just yesterday I clicked on some stupid headline
[Amit Varma]: on some stupid viral site, which was to the effect of
[Amit Varma]: why X did this to Y, right?
[Amit Varma]: But the point is, it's paginated.
[Unknown]: You have one picture and one piece of information
[Unknown]: and you're like clicking 40 times before you get to the point
[Amit Varma]: and you actually figure out why X did something to Y.
[Amit Varma]: And to me, that's not engagement.
[Amit Varma]: You know, you're clicking 40 times, you're showing 40 ads,
[Amit Varma]: you're making it interesting enough,
[Amit Varma]: perhaps that the reader stays with you and goes on to the next one,
[Amit Varma]: but it doesn't mean anything to them emotionally
[Amit Varma]: or intellectually or in any way at all.
[Amit Varma]: So they've spent time, but the engagement isn't high, you know?
[Amit Varma]: And you're monetizing it.
[Amit Varma]: But then the point is, if you create that deeper engagement,
[Amit Varma]: like that girl whose life, who wrote that thing to you,
[Amit Varma]: would have come to your site every day after that, right?
[Amit Varma]: It would have been a part of her life in that deep way.
[Amit Varma]: And you can't measure that, right?
[Amit Varma]: So do you sort of have any thoughts about it?
[Guest]: Yeah, yeah. So I think you're right.
[Guest]: Just the fact that at least at that point in time,
[Guest]: I believe that the fact that the user is actually clicking 40 times
[Guest]: to find out what it is, they're probably interested enough
[Guest]: and so they are engaged enough.
[Guest]: We did have the paginated system at one point in time.
[Guest]: We removed it later on,
[Guest]: figuring out that this is a very bad way of keeping the users on the site and all,
[Guest]: but we did have it for probably a few months or so.
[Guest]: So, see, my answer to that is,
[Guest]: first of all, I feel that the fact that she clicked 40 times,
[Guest]: you see, you can't make anybody click so many times
[Guest]: without the intent, right, of really finding out what happened, etc.
[Guest]: And you clicked 40 times,
[Guest]: or you scrolled it down and then disclosed it.
[Guest]: It's the same thing packaged in a different way, right?
[Guest]: It's just that if you click again and again,
[Guest]: you probably make more money because you can show more ads and whatever, right?
[Guest]: So I don't agree with the part where you say that is not engagement.
[Guest]: At least in my mind, to my business, it was engagement.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, it is engagement, but it's what I would call thin engagement.
[Guest]: But then that depends on the kind of content we did, right?
[Guest]: So we didn't necessarily do all content which was thick engagement content.
[Guest]: I don't think we did.
[Guest]: And I think that was one of the things that was wrong with WittyFeed.
[Guest]: So that reminds me of something very interesting.
[Guest]: When WittyFeed got shut down and it was doing 120 million uniques at that point in time,
[Guest]: and when we were thinking about what to do next and what was wrong with WittyFeed,
[Guest]: one of the things that we thought about was that when a product is actually good
[Guest]: and it really matters to its people and it goes away, people cry for it.
[Guest]: There will be somebody somewhere out there that it mattered so much
[Guest]: that they would want it back anyhow, right?
[Guest]: And they'll miss it, they'll reach out to you, they'll write to you, all of that, right?
[Guest]: Out of 120 million, nobody did, right?
[Guest]: And which is why I feel that because of the format or because of the way you can monetize
[Guest]: online content through ads, etc.,
[Guest]: unfortunately, most of us ended up building very thin engagement websites.
[Guest]: You have to bring the user to the website.
[Guest]: How do you optimize for maximum time spent so that you can show maximum ads
[Guest]: and so you can make maximum money out of it?
[Guest]: And which is where, again, from believing that you want to create a positive content site,
[Guest]: that dilute happens, that you keep telling yourself,
[Guest]: no, I'm not making positive content anyway,
[Guest]: but it's not for that deep engagement.
[Guest]: Now, how do I optimize for maximum revenue and so on and so forth?
[Guest]: So nobody cried for WittyFeed, right?
[Guest]: And we wanted to change that this time.
[Guest]: When we were thinking about a new idea, we said, we won't make it like this.
[Guest]: Even if we make it for less people this time,
[Guest]: but this time when I want to do it, I want to do it.
[Guest]: I want to build a product that really matters to people.
[Guest]: If it doesn't exist, then maybe someone will cry and say,
[Guest]: what happened to my life? It was so important to me, basically.
[Guest]: So I think WittyFeed over time became a thin engagement site only.
[Guest]: If it was a thick engagement site, it wouldn't have died from Facebook.
[Amit Varma]: Is what I would say.
[Amit Varma]: I'm not even making a judgment call in the sense that some things I do,
[Amit Varma]: I try to be thick engagement. Some things I'm okay with thin engagement.
[Amit Varma]: There's a value to that as well.
[Amit Varma]: If you're entertaining people or if you're, you know, satisfying some other need,
[Amit Varma]: I don't see anything to look down on at all.
[Amit Varma]: That's also important and people who do it well are doing a great job.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me also about your approach to building the team that you did.
[Amit Varma]: Like one really, one insight you shared in one of your talks,
[Amit Varma]: which impressed me a lot, was where you were sharing the story of a team member,
[Amit Varma]: who when he came to you for the interview,
[Amit Varma]: he said, this is my last interview, I won't do it again.
[Amit Varma]: And you asked, why is that? And he said,
[Amit Varma]: No, I go everywhere and people ask, how is your English?
[Amit Varma]: And this is where I get marked.
[Amit Varma]: And you said, it's not like that here.
[Amit Varma]: And you hired the person and then at the time you gave the talk,
[Amit Varma]: you said he was leading one of your teams and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And this is something that I totally agree with in the sense that over time,
[Amit Varma]: I would not have thought this when I was, say, a manager 20 years ago or whatever.
[Amit Varma]: But over time, I have come to realize that the most important thing is attitude.
[Amit Varma]: That are you open to learning?
[Amit Varma]: You know, if you have the humility and you have the openness to learn,
[Amit Varma]: then the skills don't matter so much.
[Amit Varma]: You can teach anything.
[Amit Varma]: So one, tell me a little bit about how you evolved your philosophy towards employees,
[Amit Varma]: because like another unusual thing you did and Sringda mentions in a book that
[Amit Varma]: everybody used to live in these two large bungalows.
[Amit Varma]: So it was like a family.
[Amit Varma]: The orientation was that it's not just a normal company,
[Amit Varma]: you're an employee, you come into work,
[Amit Varma]: attendance is done, you check out your card and you get out of there.
[Amit Varma]: But you're all actually kind of living together.
[Amit Varma]: You and your wife are called brother and sister-in-law apparently.
[Amit Varma]: So where did this philosophy come from?
[Amit Varma]: That we will do it this way.
[Amit Varma]: Like, why did you, how did you come up with this?
[Amit Varma]: You know, what were the roadblocks you faced?
[Amit Varma]: What were the learnings that you got from it?
[Amit Varma]: So I'm just very keen to understand your approach towards people and employees.
[Guest]: Yeah, let me start by completing that story that you mentioned, right?
[Guest]: So see, again, we were very young and we were hiring, right?
[Guest]: So by default, you don't get the best of the talent options for you.
[Guest]: Number one.
[Guest]: Second, it's very hard to work with people who are older in age,
[Guest]: because again, it's very hard to establish authority and like all that.
[Guest]: It doesn't work very well.
[Guest]: Actually, it does not.
[Guest]: Over time it changed, but at least when you're little too young,
[Guest]: who will listen to a 22-year-old boy, basically, right? So we mostly hired freshers at that time.
[Guest]: How do you judge them?
[Guest]: How do you figure out if this guy is a good guy or not, right?
[Guest]: So then attitude is the only skill.
[Guest]: You can't do much anyway.
[Guest]: And we ended up building a policy of hiring only freshers.
[Guest]: Let's work with only freshers.
[Guest]: One, we get them at a low price.
[Guest]: And second, we can hire them on their attitude.
[Guest]: We'll teach them the skill, basically.
[Guest]: Always believed that skill can be taught and attitude can't be.
[Guest]: So how do you judge?
[Guest]: So we, and again, when you're young and like I believed in hustling so much.
[Guest]: I still do, but a little too much at that point in time.
[Guest]: So we used to actually judge at two things and this was Shashank's discovery.
[Guest]: He's always been better among the three,
[Guest]: the best among three of us in terms of finding out the right ways to interview people, etc.
[Guest]: Not that I'm very proud of what we used to do.
[Guest]: We wanted to see how he reacts when he's put out of comfort zone.
[Guest]: And second, is he never giving up attitude or not?
[Guest]: If he's a person who gives up, he won't be able to do it because he has to learn new things.
[Guest]: It's a start-up, anyway, he'll have to work extra hard.
[Guest]: People used to work for 2-3 days at night at that time.
[Guest]: Again, that is how companies are built in the initial days.
[Guest]: So what we used to do, we used to ask people to do push-ups.
[Guest]: Nobody would expect to do push-ups in the interview.
[Guest]: Mostly boys and girls were also asked to do something like this, something weird.
[Guest]: And this was Sunil's name, it started with Sunil.
[Guest]: So Sunil came and he said,
[Guest]: this is my last interview, I'm done, I've come from the village, I've tried a lot.
[Guest]: But everyone says, what do you know already?
[Guest]: And they ask in English, what else do you know?
[Guest]: Nobody is ready to teach, I'm ready to learn, but nobody is ready to teach.
[Guest]: So now I'll go to my village, I'll do farming, I'm done here.
[Guest]: Shashank was the interviewer, by the way.
[Guest]: So Shashank said, okay, what can you do?
[Guest]: I said, sir, I'll do whatever you say for this job.
[Guest]: So I think he did one of the two things.
[Guest]: Either he was asked to do push-ups at that time,
[Guest]: or another thing that Shashank used to do,
[Guest]: our office was on the 6th floor.
[Guest]: So he would ask people to do 6 floors up and down through stairs,
[Guest]: some 4-5 times, something like that, basically.
[Guest]: Something that is basically undoable, essentially, right?
[Guest]: And if you're ready to do that, the idea was that I know.
[Guest]: It was basically an army-type style of hiring.
[Guest]: It was a roadie-type interview, that if you do something that is unthinkable,
[Guest]: then at least you don't have an attitude problem.
[Guest]: The skill is on us whether we can teach or not.
[Guest]: So we told Sunil something like that, and he did it.
[Guest]: And it was crazy, he turned out to be an amazing hire, actually.
[Guest]: And he was with us for the longest time,
[Guest]: and I'm so proud to tell you that he runs his own company today in Indore.
[Guest]: He runs his own IT company, has some employees,
[Guest]: some 40-50 people, I think.
[Guest]: And he's doing phenomenal, actually.
[Guest]: That guy, if his interview didn't go well that day, he would have left.
[Guest]: So much talent which goes, you know, unutilized because nobody gave them a chance, right?
[Guest]: And plus, I think language cannot be a judge.
[Guest]: Language cannot be a parameter to judge somebody's talent, basically.
[Guest]: That's the most poor way of, very lazy way of finding out
[Guest]: how talented you are or not, right?
[Guest]: So then that interview turned into a thing.
[Guest]: It was a roadie-style interview.
[Guest]: Of course, we would ask simple questions, all that stuff also.
[Guest]: But then, by default, there were push-ups in every interview.
[Guest]: It was something weird.
[Guest]: Then Shashank did something weird.
[Guest]: We had a golf strip in the office.
[Guest]: So basically, he used to say,
[Guest]: you have to put it in 10 times in a row or 5 times in a row.
[Guest]: The ball should go into the hole.
[Guest]: If you miss once in the middle, start again.
[Guest]: Now, it would take hours, but people used to do that.
[Guest]: People used to do that,
[Guest]: that they would continuously put it in 5 times.
[Guest]: And that is when you know,
[Guest]: if a person gives something to him, he will put his life on the line.
[Guest]: This is confirmed.
[Guest]: Whether it will happen or not, that is later,
[Guest]: but he will put his life on the line.
[Guest]: This is confirmed.
[Guest]: The person will never give up.
[Guest]: And I think which is why we ended up building an army of, you know,
[Guest]: it was generally an army,
[Guest]: an army of people who were just not ready to give up on anything.
[Guest]: And that is why we were able to build a company against all odds.
[Guest]: So that is how we built it up.
[Amit Varma]: One, this sounds like a great way of electing for attitude,
[Amit Varma]: but it's also a little, you know,
[Amit Varma]: like you said that looking back,
[Guest]: I would not have done this now or something.
[Guest]: So why is that?
[Guest]: What are the misgivings you have about this?
[Guest]: This is very masculine in nature, I think, right?
[Guest]: And again,
[Guest]: it's not like 100% correct way of basically finding it out.
[Guest]: We still look for never giving up attitude.
[Guest]: We still look for,
[Guest]: I think even today in the new company that we're building,
[Guest]: we still look for similar stuff that we test for.
[Guest]: The thing that has changed is that we do look for skill fit also,
[Guest]: but I think we still look for culture fit and never giving up attitude.
[Guest]: And that are you, do you have a learning attitude?
[Guest]: There are different type of questions that we ask now to understand that,
[Guest]: but we do still look for the same skill.
[Guest]: I think that we used to look back in the day.
[Amit Varma]: And these days in corporate circles,
[Amit Varma]: like where I have been a long time back,
[Amit Varma]: I think I quit my last job and I said,
[Amit Varma]: I'll never work in an office again,
[Amit Varma]: but there's a lot of talk these days of corporate culture and so on and so
[Amit Varma]: forth and your corporate culture, as it were,
[Amit Varma]: like, you know,
[Amit Varma]: tell me a little bit about how you arrived at that,
[Amit Varma]: that this is the right way to do something.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know,
[Amit Varma]: and what do you feel about that sort of,
[Amit Varma]: I won't say experiment,
[Amit Varma]: but that experience now looking back,
[Guest]: I think it came from,
[Guest]: again,
[Guest]: the way I grew up.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: So,
[Guest]: and my belief of joint family and family as a thing.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: So,
[Guest]: business or personal life and all that stuff.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: And you should never work with your friends.
[Guest]: You should never work with your family and all that stuff.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: I am the first guy who was made out of,
[Guest]: like,
[Guest]: who have an exit possibility from the middle class life of my family.
[Guest]: And if I don't handhold and work with the rest of my,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: cousins and brothers and sisters and my family,
[Guest]: then who will.
[Guest]: And I should definitely do that.
[Guest]: One.
[Guest]: Second,
[Guest]: I always believed that when you lead with emotion,
[Guest]: you actually build better companies and better businesses.
[Guest]: You can build better businesses.
[Guest]: I believe that.
[Guest]: I didn't have any data.
[Guest]: I was making it for the first time,
[Guest]: but I believed that with the right intent in place and all the empathy,
[Guest]: all the like treating people as people,
[Guest]: what is wrong with it?
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: So,
[Guest]: and if I can be unbiased,
[Guest]: having my brother as my co-founder,
[Guest]: having my wife work in the same company and so on,
[Guest]: and what's wrong with it,
[Guest]: et cetera.
[Guest]: Or you have some people that you can trust blindly in your business and you
[Guest]: need them.
[Guest]: You need such people when you're building.
[Guest]: At least.
[Guest]: To a large extent.
[Guest]: So I had my brother as my co-founder.
[Guest]: I actually,
[Guest]: my relationship with my other co-founder is also pretty much like a brother.
[Guest]: There was a point in time in our story where I and Shashank also departed and
[Guest]: then we came back together and then we decided saying the exact thing that you
[Guest]: said.
[Guest]: So if we do it this time,
[Guest]: we do it with an option to never go away from each other.
[Guest]: Like there's no option to call it quits on each other.
[Guest]: And so let's be brothers and not like the co-founders.
[Guest]: Co-founders later as brothers first,
[Guest]: that's the relationship that we share.
[Guest]: And have you seen such amazing ups and downs and we've,
[Guest]: we've stuck together.
[Guest]: I think it's a miracle.
[Guest]: And it's because of the way we look at our relationship.
[Guest]: The reality of relationship is not that we're co-founders,
[Guest]: but it is that we're family,
[Guest]: we're brothers,
[Guest]: and then we be,
[Guest]: we're co-founders.
[Guest]: We value our relationship with the three of us more than the fact that we work
[Guest]: together basically.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: So there was a book called Super Siblings.
[Guest]: Preeti is the writer.
[Guest]: I forget her full name.
[Guest]: So she reached out to one of my co-founders.
[Guest]: She reached out to Praveen.
[Guest]: And she asked,
[Guest]: I'm writing a book on Super Siblings and I would like to cover your story.
[Guest]: I said, of course,
[Guest]: because you write on both brothers.
[Guest]: Praveen said,
[Guest]: Madam, we are three brothers.
[Guest]: If you want to write,
[Guest]: write on three.
[Guest]: We will be two brothers for your book.
[Guest]: And Preeti was so kind that she wrote a special chapter about us in that book.
[Guest]: The last chapter,
[Guest]: which was a brother from another mother.
[Guest]: And she wrote a story about the three of us.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: So that's the kind of relationship we've had.
[Guest]: So working with family,
[Guest]: working with emotions,
[Guest]: working like a family is not a bad thing.
[Guest]: Is what I believed.
[Guest]: There has been a little change.
[Guest]: I'll talk about that too.
[Guest]: How has it changed?
[Guest]: The logic of the house we used to live in together was that there were all freshers.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: You ask,
[Guest]: you invite a fresher to work with you.
[Guest]: Mostly,
[Guest]: some people were from Indore,
[Guest]: but we would hire from everywhere.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: So people would come from small,
[Guest]: small towns.
[Guest]: The biggest headache of their life is finding a house.
[Guest]: No one gives a good house to bachelors.
[Guest]: Even if you give it,
[Guest]: there are 50 types of problems in it.
[Guest]: So the lowest type of property in the city is given to bachelors.
[Guest]: They don't give good properties to bachelors.
[Guest]: Then after that,
[Guest]: even if they get it,
[Guest]: find a maid for cleaning.
[Guest]: Who will cook food?
[Guest]: If you put a tiffin outside,
[Guest]: half the time you will sleep hungry.
[Guest]: If you put a maid at home,
[Guest]: if you put a cook,
[Guest]: then that too,
[Guest]: there are thousands of problems.
[Guest]: Then grocery shopping,
[Guest]: all that.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: So our thought was that we have invited them to do a job.
[Guest]: Why can't we solve everything else for them and just let them do the job?
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: So basically,
[Guest]: we gave them a pre-made solution.
[Guest]: This is a house.
[Guest]: You go and live here.
[Guest]: There is a cook here.
[Guest]: He will cook food in the morning and evening.
[Guest]: Someone else is responsible for its grocery shopping.
[Guest]: Your job is just to work.
[Guest]: You don't have to worry about anything else.
[Guest]: And you can live a,
[Guest]: like a nice life,
[Guest]: better life,
[Guest]: basically,
[Guest]: than you would otherwise live as a bachelor,
[Guest]: etc.
[Guest]: And it worked.
[Guest]: We used to love the fact that they didn't have to take a headache.
[Guest]: And the productivity was high.
[Guest]: The food was good.
[Guest]: There was no food poisoning,
[Guest]: acidity,
[Guest]: and all these problems.
[Guest]: We used to actually serve pretty much like a Google-type lunch in the office also.
[Guest]: You used to serve lunch,
[Guest]: dinner,
[Guest]: breakfast in our office.
[Guest]: We used to serve breakfast,
[Guest]: lunch,
[Guest]: dinner in our office.
[Guest]: And in Indore,
[Guest]: on Indore standards,
[Guest]: it was famous.
[Guest]: People would call us our office as the Google of Indore type.
[Guest]: It had a lot of benefits.
[Guest]: The family part,
[Guest]: and let me give you an address.
[Guest]: Like you said,
[Guest]: people used to call us brother and sister-in-law.
[Guest]: Most of the people still,
[Guest]: we build those relationships over the years,
[Guest]: etc.
[Guest]: So,
[Guest]: we back then had a policy of not firing anyone.
[Guest]: But at Tata's,
[Guest]: I'm actually inspired by Tata's quite a lot,
[Guest]: especially Tata,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: And the philosophies that they have of the business,
[Guest]: the way they build the businesses.
[Guest]: We had a policy of not firing anyone.
[Guest]: So,
[Guest]: taking my belief in humans to a very,
[Guest]: to a very peak level.
[Guest]: So,
[Guest]: I felt that we should never give up on humans so easily,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: Beliefs,
[Guest]: I'm talking about the past because it has changed a little bit.
[Guest]: That belief has changed a little bit.
[Guest]: It has evolved a little bit.
[Guest]: So,
[Guest]: I felt that we should never give up on people.
[Guest]: I mean,
[Guest]: if it's not happening,
[Guest]: it's okay,
[Guest]: we'll figure out something else.
[Guest]: Help him,
[Guest]: help them,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: you train them,
[Guest]: you help the organization,
[Guest]: basically,
[Guest]: and freshers.
[Guest]: If we don't invest in their careers,
[Guest]: then who will invest?
[Guest]: It's my,
[Guest]: I used to believe that it's our responsibility
[Guest]: to invest in their careers,
[Guest]: to build something for them.
[Guest]: So,
[Guest]: a very family-type environment,
[Guest]: so that even after coming to the office,
[Guest]: a person should feel chilled out.
[Guest]: They shouldn't miss their home,
[Guest]: or they shouldn't feel out of the place.
[Guest]: So,
[Guest]: now,
[Guest]: that brother and sister-in-law actually happened because of this.
[Guest]: When I started,
[Guest]: I was not married,
[Guest]: of course.
[Guest]: So,
[Guest]: it started with a brother,
[Guest]: and then naturally became a sister-in-law.
[Guest]: Also,
[Guest]: it started with a brother because
[Guest]: I was very young,
[Guest]: I hated that somebody would call me sir,
[Guest]: but
[Guest]: the way,
[Guest]: the system is,
[Guest]: unfortunately,
[Guest]: they found it very weird to call me by my name.
[Guest]: They would not call me by name.
[Guest]: So,
[Guest]: the midway became a brother,
[Guest]: basically.
[Guest]: And I was okay with it,
[Guest]: again,
[Guest]: because of my family values and all that stuff,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: So,
[Guest]: we worked very hard to get rid of that brother.
[Guest]: It was very difficult to get rid of him.
[Guest]: Because,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: cultural systems change with a lot of difficulty,
[Guest]: over time.
[Guest]: Now,
[Guest]: with difficulty,
[Guest]: in the stage,
[Guest]: now,
[Guest]: I think 90% people
[Guest]: don't call us brother anymore.
[Guest]: Some people,
[Guest]: who are still around,
[Guest]: they are so ingrained in it,
[Guest]: that
[Guest]: they
[Guest]: feel bad from inside
[Guest]: that how can I call them by their name,
[Guest]: or call them sir,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: So,
[Guest]: this happened.
[Guest]: I probably can talk about that also a little bit.
[Guest]: When we built stage,
[Guest]: I realized that
[Guest]: calling
[Guest]: a company,
[Guest]: a family,
[Guest]: is a very
[Guest]: hypocrite
[Guest]: sort of a statement.
[Guest]: Because,
[Guest]: and it works both ways.
[Guest]: One is that
[Guest]: you can't fire somebody from your family.
[Guest]: We didn't fire anybody,
[Guest]: but on cause,
[Guest]: we did fire on the basis of integrity.
[Guest]: But we didn't do it.
[Guest]: And people also left.
[Guest]: They resigned.
[Guest]: So,
[Guest]: if
[Guest]: they actually believed
[Guest]: we were family,
[Guest]: why would somebody leave?
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: At that time,
[Guest]: I used to think that
[Guest]: this should be your last job.
[Guest]: This is your first job,
[Guest]: and this should be your last job.
[Guest]: Why should you ever leave?
[Guest]: If you leave,
[Guest]: you should become an entrepreneur.
[Guest]: So,
[Guest]: I used to promote entrepreneurship
[Guest]: quite a lot.
[Guest]: We used to promote that
[Guest]: So,
[Guest]: when somebody used to leave,
[Guest]: it used to be like a,
[Guest]: I would take it personally.
[Guest]: All three of us
[Guest]: would take it very personally.
[Guest]: How is he leaving?
[Guest]: How did we treat him?
[Guest]: How did we treat his family?
[Guest]: All that stuff, right?
[Guest]: So,
[Guest]: again,
[Guest]: when that pity fit ended
[Guest]: and we got the time to reflect,
[Guest]: we realized that
[Guest]: it's very
[Guest]: hypocrite.
[Guest]: People will not work for you forever.
[Guest]: Number one.
[Guest]: You need to realize that.
[Guest]: Second,
[Guest]: you need to realize that
[Guest]: you will
[Guest]: also need to fire people
[Guest]: if you want to build
[Guest]: a world-class team.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: But,
[Guest]: at the same time,
[Guest]: we concluded that
[Guest]: you can be very emotional,
[Guest]: you can be very empathetic,
[Guest]: you can be very nice to people
[Guest]: without calling it a family.
[Guest]: So, that's what we are.
[Guest]: We are a team now.
[Guest]: We are very influenced by
[Guest]: Netflix culture document,
[Guest]: by the way.
[Guest]: We use that quite a lot
[Guest]: in our system.
[Guest]: Lot of policies we have
[Guest]: replicated and all.
[Guest]: And radical candor,
[Guest]: one-on-ones,
[Guest]: all of that stuff,
[Guest]: we promote quite a lot
[Guest]: now internally.
[Guest]: So,
[Guest]: they say that
[Guest]: we are a team.
[Guest]: And in a team,
[Guest]: everybody knows that
[Guest]: if you don't perform,
[Guest]: you can be replaced.
[Guest]: We contextualized it
[Guest]: in our way
[Guest]: that you can be replaced,
[Guest]: but we will not replace you
[Guest]: immediately.
[Guest]: We will give you a chance.
[Guest]: We built a very
[Guest]: comprehensive skill
[Guest]: gap assessment system.
[Guest]: And
[Guest]: the company,
[Guest]: your manager,
[Guest]: we will invest
[Guest]: and we will invest money,
[Guest]: we will invest time
[Guest]: and we will invest effort
[Guest]: with you to
[Guest]: fill the gap
[Guest]: in terms of what we want
[Guest]: your skill level to be.
[Guest]: And
[Guest]: something that you also agree on.
[Guest]: If you make progress,
[Guest]: we will keep doing it
[Guest]: and we will keep you with us.
[Guest]: If you don't,
[Guest]: then we replace you.
[Guest]: Which is fair and square
[Guest]: both ways, right?
[Guest]: Even you will leave
[Guest]: if you don't feel satisfied here.
[Guest]: I will fire you
[Guest]: if you're
[Guest]: not making progress,
[Guest]: but
[Guest]: I can fire you
[Guest]: without guilt now
[Guest]: and you can leave
[Guest]: without hurting me now
[Guest]: because
[Guest]: and I will not be hurt
[Guest]: because I know that people
[Guest]: will not work for me forever.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: And
[Guest]: I'm openly
[Guest]: I openly say that
[Guest]: it's a team
[Guest]: and not a family
[Guest]: without
[Guest]: meaning that
[Guest]: I'm not there
[Guest]: for you anymore.
[Guest]: I am still
[Guest]: I think we are
[Guest]: even more available
[Guest]: to our team now
[Guest]: emotionally,
[Guest]: we are more available
[Guest]: in terms of financial
[Guest]: like in every way
[Guest]: that we used to support
[Guest]: them at Witty Feed.
[Guest]: We support them
[Guest]: probably
[Guest]: 10% more now
[Guest]: but we're not a family.
[Guest]: And I
[Guest]: and I think it was
[Guest]: more about
[Guest]: we accepting that fact
[Guest]: than our people
[Guest]: accepting it.
[Guest]: So
[Guest]: we accepted it
[Guest]: and it has turned out
[Guest]: to be a
[Guest]: more
[Guest]: fulfilling experience
[Guest]: building this.
[Amit Varma]: One of the
[Amit Varma]: themes that I'm
[Amit Varma]: I've become very interested in
[Amit Varma]: is people's relationship
[Amit Varma]: with their past.
[Amit Varma]: Like when someone
[Amit Varma]: makes a journey like yours
[Amit Varma]: where you're born in a village
[Amit Varma]: you go to a city
[Amit Varma]: then you're
[Amit Varma]: you're kind of
[Amit Varma]: moving up ladders
[Amit Varma]: in a certain way
[Amit Varma]: at a faster speed
[Amit Varma]: than the rest of your family
[Amit Varma]: might have been able to.
[Amit Varma]: And
[Amit Varma]: how that relationship
[Amit Varma]: with the past plays out
[Amit Varma]: is very interesting to me.
[Amit Varma]: Like some people
[Amit Varma]: can be embarrassed
[Amit Varma]: by their past
[Amit Varma]: and keep it at a distance
[Amit Varma]: while others
[Amit Varma]: can embrace it
[Amit Varma]: because of the sense
[Amit Varma]: of belonging
[Amit Varma]: and home and community
[Amit Varma]: and rootedness
[Amit Varma]: that it gives them.
[Amit Varma]: Like there's a beautiful
[Amit Varma]: short story by Ken Liu
[Amit Varma]: called Paper Menagerie
[Amit Varma]: one of my favorite stories
[Amit Varma]: which I'll link
[Amit Varma]: in the description box
[Amit Varma]: which is
[Amit Varma]: about this person
[Amit Varma]: coming to terms
[Amit Varma]: with the embarrassment
[Amit Varma]: he felt
[Amit Varma]: because his mother
[Amit Varma]: was out of place in America
[Amit Varma]: he was an immigrant
[Amit Varma]: and she couldn't
[Amit Varma]: speak the language
[Amit Varma]: and all that.
[Amit Varma]: Just a lovely story.
[Amit Varma]: So
[Amit Varma]: and in your case
[Amit Varma]: it seems that
[Amit Varma]: you went completely
[Amit Varma]: with the second option
[Amit Varma]: which is that
[Amit Varma]: that past
[Amit Varma]: meant a lot to you
[Amit Varma]: family meant a lot to you
[Amit Varma]: you married your sweetheart
[Amit Varma]: from your village
[Amit Varma]: and you
[Amit Varma]: sort of
[Amit Varma]: you kept your friends together
[Amit Varma]: like you mentioned Tata
[Amit Varma]: I've heard you quote
[Amit Varma]: something to the effect of
[Amit Varma]: if you want to go fast
[Guest]: go alone
[Guest]: if you want to go far
[Guest]: go together
[Amit Varma]: which is so beautiful
[Amit Varma]: so tell me a little bit about
[Amit Varma]: like was your relationship
[Amit Varma]: with your past
[Amit Varma]: complicated at times
[Amit Varma]: did you sometimes look back
[Amit Varma]: and like
[Amit Varma]: just now you've said
[Amit Varma]: sometimes I wonder
[Guest]: how I was born in that family
[Guest]: so how has that been?
[Guest]: I think you're right
[Guest]: I
[Guest]: I love
[Guest]: where I come from
[Guest]: I think
[Guest]: I feel very lucky
[Guest]: for
[Guest]: where I was born
[Guest]: whether it's my village
[Guest]: whether it's my family
[Guest]: whether it's
[Guest]: my particular set of parents
[Guest]: I think
[Guest]: I feel
[Guest]: very privileged
[Guest]: to be born
[Guest]: the way
[Guest]: and
[Guest]: where
[Guest]: and how I was born
[Guest]: basically
[Guest]: so
[Guest]: if I was not born
[Guest]: where I was born
[Guest]: I would not be building
[Guest]: stage today
[Guest]: basically
[Guest]: it's as simple as that
[Guest]: right so
[Guest]: I literally owe
[Guest]: what I am right now
[Guest]: to the place
[Guest]: that I was born
[Guest]: right
[Guest]: it's been days
[Guest]: I was watching a video
[Guest]: of Neeraj Chopra
[Guest]: right
[Guest]: so
[Guest]: Amitabh ji
[Guest]: asked him
[Guest]: Bachchan sahab
[Guest]: I saw
[Guest]: that you have
[Guest]: struggled a lot
[Guest]: to reach your life
[Guest]: in his own
[Guest]: heavy voice
[Guest]: so
[Guest]: Neeraj Chopra
[Guest]: and he's a
[Guest]: you know
[Guest]: he's a very
[Guest]: the way he talks
[Unknown]: he's very
[Guest]: straight from the heart
[Guest]: sort of a guy
[Guest]: right
[Guest]: so sir
[Guest]: it was very important
[Guest]: if I had got
[Guest]: everything in life
[Guest]: if
[Guest]: I
[Guest]: had struggled
[Guest]: with him
[Guest]: because I come
[Guest]: from a very
[Guest]: similar place
[Guest]: that if
[Guest]: my parents
[Guest]: would have gone
[Guest]: to school to leave
[Guest]: and pick me
[Guest]: and if I would have
[Guest]: got everything
[Guest]: before asking
[Guest]: and all this
[Guest]: would have happened
[Guest]: I mean
[Guest]: so
[Guest]: maybe I would have
[Guest]: never been so
[Guest]: successful in life
[Guest]: basically
[Guest]: he said that
[Guest]: I had
[Guest]: immense amount
[Guest]: of struggles
[Guest]: but I
[Guest]: love the fact
[Guest]: that I had them
[Guest]: and which is
[Guest]: what happened
[Guest]: to me
[Guest]: including
[Guest]: the witty feed thing
[Guest]: anything
[Guest]: from the start
[Guest]: you pick it up
[Guest]: that
[Guest]: I
[Guest]: I ended up
[Guest]: in quota
[Guest]: most people can
[Guest]: look back at it
[Guest]: and say Gary
[Guest]: it was the wrong thing
[Guest]: I think it was the
[Guest]: most important
[Guest]: juncture
[Guest]: of my life
[Guest]: to become a doctor
[Guest]: and then
[Guest]: you know
[Guest]: ending up
[Guest]: with engineering
[Guest]: I very soon
[Guest]: figured out
[Guest]: I don't want to be
[Guest]: a doctor
[Guest]: and I
[Guest]: entered my
[Guest]: college
[Guest]: it was
[Guest]: and so
[Guest]: people can say
[Guest]: that I was
[Guest]: in the wrong
[Guest]: education
[Guest]: I think I was
[Guest]: in the
[Guest]: the perfect
[Guest]: place
[Guest]: people can have
[Guest]: regrets about
[Guest]: that I
[Guest]: didn't get
[Guest]: into IIT
[Guest]: I would have
[Guest]: not gotten
[Guest]: Shashank
[Guest]: if I had
[Guest]: gone to IIT
[Guest]: I think
[Guest]: it was the
[Guest]: right thing
[Guest]: if I had
[Guest]: gone to IIT
[Guest]: I would have
[Guest]: not
[Guest]: done anything
[Guest]: differently
[Guest]: I am happy with
[Guest]: the person
[Guest]: that I am
[Guest]: today
[Guest]: I am very
[Guest]: proud of the
[Guest]: person that
[Guest]: I am today
[Guest]: actually
[Guest]: and so
[Guest]: I will not
[Guest]: change a thing
[Guest]: because then
[Guest]: if I do
[Guest]: I will not
[Guest]: end up
[Guest]: where I am
[Guest]: and I am
[Guest]: very happy
[Guest]: and very
[Guest]: satisfied
[Guest]: to be honest
[Guest]: with the
[Guest]: kind of
[Guest]: person
[Guest]: you seem
[Guest]: like a city
[Guest]: person
[Guest]: I think
[Guest]: I am a
[Guest]: I embrace
[Guest]: where I am
[Guest]: but I
[Guest]: miss my
[Guest]: village
[Guest]: I am a
[Guest]: village person
[Guest]: actually
[Guest]: you know
[Guest]: I like
[Guest]: I don't
[Guest]: like the
[Guest]: city
[Guest]: I live in
[Guest]: Noida
[Guest]: whereas
[Guest]: I come from
[Guest]: Haryana
[Guest]: we work in
[Guest]: everybody
[Guest]: thought
[Guest]: and
[Guest]: startup
[Guest]: from
[Guest]: Noida
[Guest]: everybody
[Unknown]: thought
[Unknown]: I just
[Guest]: don't
[Guest]: basically
[Guest]: it's still
[Guest]: high rise
[Guest]: and all
[Guest]: but
[Guest]: gardens
[Guest]: you know
[Guest]: I can
[Guest]: go
[Guest]: down
[Guest]: and roam
[Guest]: on the
[Guest]: roads
[Guest]: and like
[Guest]: I feel
[Guest]: much
[Guest]: closer to
[Guest]: home in
[Guest]: Noida
[Guest]: versus
[Guest]: I would
[Guest]: ever do
[Guest]: in
[Guest]: Goodgaon
[Guest]: actually
[Guest]: that way
[Guest]: my
[Guest]: fantasy
[Guest]: of retirement
[Guest]: is
[Guest]: going back
[Guest]: to my
[Guest]: village
[Guest]: and
[Guest]: thankfully
[Guest]: I got a
[Guest]: wife
[Guest]: which thinks
[Guest]: very similarly
[Guest]: so I
[Guest]: want to
[Guest]: go back
[Guest]: to my
[Guest]: village
[Guest]: have a
[Guest]: small
[Guest]: school
[Guest]: up and
[Guest]: up there
[Guest]: and just
[Guest]: retire
[Guest]: like that
[Guest]: for my
[Guest]: village
[Guest]: people
[Guest]: all of that
[Guest]: and whenever
[Guest]: I get a chance
[Guest]: I speak very
[Guest]: proudly about
[Amit Varma]: where I come
[Amit Varma]: from
[Amit Varma]: what do you do
[Amit Varma]: in your
[Amit Varma]: free time
[Amit Varma]: you mentioned
[Amit Varma]: that you're in
[Amit Varma]: Noida
[Amit Varma]: you like the
[Amit Varma]: open space
[Amit Varma]: all of that
[Amit Varma]: like I know
[Amit Varma]: you're very
[Amit Varma]: obviously very
[Amit Varma]: intense about
[Amit Varma]: your work
[Amit Varma]: and you spend
[Guest]: a lot of
[Guest]: time on
[Guest]: that
[Guest]: but
[Guest]: I used
[Guest]: to work
[Guest]: 16-18 hours
[Guest]: a day
[Guest]: I would
[Guest]: travel
[Guest]: 17-18 days
[Guest]: a month
[Guest]: sometimes 20
[Guest]: days a month
[Guest]: and it was
[Guest]: crazy
[Guest]: and then
[Guest]: I realized
[Guest]: that it
[Guest]: doesn't make
[Guest]: sense
[Guest]: I don't
[Guest]: want to
[Guest]: live a
[Guest]: life like
[Guest]: that
[Guest]: so I
[Guest]: laid back
[Guest]: that doesn't
[Guest]: mean that
[Guest]: I'm not
[Guest]: building it
[Guest]: with passion
[Guest]: for the
[Guest]: next 10 years
[Guest]: and how I
[Guest]: want to live
[Guest]: next 10 years
[Guest]: so I said
[Guest]: I lived
[Guest]: my entire
[Guest]: 10 years
[Guest]: wanting
[Guest]: big and
[Guest]: fast
[Guest]: those were
[Guest]: the two
[Guest]: keywords
[Guest]: I wanted
[Guest]: everything very
[Guest]: big and
[Guest]: fast
[Guest]: and I want
[Guest]: to live
[Guest]: the next
[Guest]: 10 years
[Guest]: for like
[Guest]: slow and
[Guest]: small
[Guest]: like I
[Guest]: want to
[Guest]: build
[Guest]: and I want
[Guest]: to build
[Guest]: small
[Guest]: steps
[Guest]: and I
[Guest]: want to
[Guest]: put a
[Guest]: disclaimer here
[Guest]: that it
[Guest]: doesn't
[Guest]: mean that
[Guest]: I don't
[Guest]: have large
[Guest]: aspirations
[Guest]: I still
[Guest]: do
[Guest]: but it's
[Guest]: just that
[Guest]: I don't
[Guest]: want it
[Guest]: fast
[Guest]: and I
[Guest]: don't
[Guest]: want it
[Guest]: big
[Guest]: chunks
[Guest]: I
[Guest]: am material
[Guest]: limited
[Guest]: I
[Guest]: don't
[Guest]: want
[Guest]: everything
[Guest]: big
[Guest]: and
[Guest]: small
[Guest]: I
[Guest]: like to
[Guest]: do
[Guest]: meditation
[Guest]: I like to
[Guest]: do yoga
[Guest]: I
[Guest]: like to
[Guest]: watch
[Guest]: a lot
[Guest]: of content
[Guest]: I
[Guest]: mostly
[Guest]: watch
[Guest]: English
[Guest]: content
[Guest]: and I
[Guest]: when I'm
[Guest]: down
[Guest]: and not
[Guest]: feeling good
[Guest]: I
[Guest]: But I like to, you know, learn new stuff all the time.
[Guest]: I'm generally a very curious person.
[Guest]: So and one of my main source of learning is actually not books or not podcasts or any
[Guest]: of that stuff is actually meeting people and talking to them.
[Guest]: So I actually spend a lot of time talking to my friends, mentors, I have humongous number
[Guest]: of advisors and mentors in life, something that I'm very proud of, that I've been able
[Guest]: to build.
[Guest]: And I talk to them very often, I spend a lot of time talking to them, learning from them.
[Guest]: Toh wo sab kaafi karta hu.
[Guest]: And otherwise, I like to spend time with my wife and my family a lot actually.
[Guest]: Toh main kabhi koshish karta hu unke saath samay bitaane ke jitna.
[Guest]: Mujhe lagta hai ki yaar as an entrepreneur, anyways hum materialistic cheezein toh deni
[Guest]: paate hain un logon ko kuch zyada, right, kyuki humesai tangi rehti hain, paise ki toh.
[Guest]: So you're always underpaid, you're always short on, you know, there's something or the
[Guest]: other going wrong in your company and so you're always under stress, all of that stuff, right.
[Guest]: At least aap unko samay de sakte hoon.
[Guest]: And that's the most important gift that you can give them, right.
[Guest]: So you sit down, listen to them.
[Guest]: And also, I try my best to give as much time as I can give to my wife, my family, my parents
[Guest]: live with me.
[Guest]: That's also a condition I put on them ki, I just will not live without you guys and
[Guest]: I hope they continue to live with me for the rest of their days or my days, whatever.
[Guest]: So yeah, I do that, spending time with family a lot more.
[Amit Varma]: That's also a lovely, that's such a lovely thought of, you know, giving time to your
[Amit Varma]: family because just thinking aloud, you know, when people are gone and you miss them, you
[Guest]: never remember the things they gave you, you remember the time you spent with them.
[Guest]: Again, meri wife ka bahut influence raha hai isme.
[Guest]: And I probably found her and fell in love with her and we married because of those similarities
[Guest]: and thoughts also that both of us are far, far away from metalistic stuff, basically.
[Guest]: Toh humein na jyada mehenge kapde, na jyada mehengi cheeze, na badi gadi, na bada ghar
[Guest]: yeh sab bilkul bhi samajh nahi aata hai, thankfully.
[Guest]: And we both are alike that way, right.
[Guest]: So matlab, my way of showing you my love will never be about giving you costly, like very
[Guest]: expensive gifts, mujhe toh, I feel actually very bad when even somebody gives it to me
[Guest]: and like, I can't do it, mere bas ki baat nahi hai, I will, I will sit down with you,
[Guest]: I will be there when you need me.
[Guest]: If you are feeling down, I'm going to sit down with you and have like a three hour long
[Guest]: conversation in a row and I don't mind doing it, mera koi bahut important meeting hoga
[Guest]: main miss kar dunga usko, if I need to sit with you and like, spend time with you.
[Guest]: But mere se yeh nahi hoga ki aapke birthday pe main 50,000 rupee ka gift dera hun, mere
[Guest]: bas ki baat, 5000 kai dena muskil kaam hai, metalistic cheeze nahi hoti hai mujhe, basically,
[Guest]: it's very, very hard for me to do that.
[Amit Varma]: You've also, you know, mentioned at different times, how there have been so many ups and
[Amit Varma]: downs, ebbs and flows in your time, you know, and especially the way Witty Feed ended, like
[Amit Varma]: if it happened to something I built, I think it would have been so incredibly traumatic
[Amit Varma]: ki mujhe pata nahi ki motivation kaise aati mujhe ki continue karo, you know, it would
[Amit Varma]: have felt like the end of the world.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me a little bit about that phase, if you want to talk about any earlier downs,
[Amit Varma]: if you think they are relevant, but you know, when it was ending, you know, how did it happen?
[Amit Varma]: How did you get through it?
[Amit Varma]: You know, like, wo poora process kaisa tha ki aap wahan se aap phir continue karke yahan
[Amit Varma]: tak hai?
[Guest]: So, so yeah, I mean, there have been multiple instances, even Witty Feed banane se pehle
[Guest]: bhi aur banate time bhi bhot saari time aisa hua, sab hua, but for without a doubt, this
[Guest]: experience of losing Witty Feed entirely, after building it at such a large scale was
[Guest]: the biggest one in the entire thing, right?
[Guest]: And it was very traumatic.
[Guest]: It was very depressing.
[Guest]: All three of us, we were diagnosed clinically depressed after that.
[Guest]: Teen saal se hum log therapy kari rahe hain, jab bhi jaisa hi figure out kiya and then
[Guest]: we started, tab se hum, all of us are on therapy.
[Guest]: We did some medication also in between, we had to take some medication also to come out
[Guest]: of it and all.
[Guest]: See it's the right analogy and I'm not exaggerating when I say it is that you raise a baby and
[Guest]: you lose it when they are eight year old.
[Guest]: That's what it was.
[Guest]: Now couple it with the fact that this is the only identity that you have of yourself out
[Guest]: there to the world.
[Guest]: You started it in college and that's the only way people know you and there's so much, there
[Guest]: was so much fucking fame around it.
[Guest]: Matlab yaar, we were at one point in time, the poster boys of the tier two ecosystem,
[Guest]: startup ecosystem in the country.
[Guest]: There was ET writing about us, like everywhere we were being called to every conference.
[Guest]: We were sort of a mini celebrity in our own right at that point in time, right?
[Guest]: And then all of a sudden it all goes away.
[Guest]: So entrepreneurs do one thing, which is that, and it's a big mistake we all make, which
[Guest]: is that we, not entrepreneurs, I think all people who are passionate about building anything
[Guest]: they do, this is that they associate their idea of self with the work that they do, right?
[Guest]: And we did that of course.
[Guest]: Toh hamara toh identity hi witty feed, witty feed founders, witty feed founders and all
[Guest]: of a sudden that didn't exist.
[Guest]: So the very first thing we had was identity crisis.
[Guest]: Who are we?
[Guest]: Witty feed hi nahi hai, hum witty feed ke founders hai, toh hum kaun hai?
[Guest]: And we had no idea, kyuki itni, itna, see, you need to understand Amit that the intensity
[Guest]: of, the intensity with which you have to build when you're building a company, the entrepreneurial
[Guest]: experience people don't realize that that's so dense.
[Guest]: The density of experiences when you are building a company is so very high that aapko ek baar
[Guest]: bhi aise sochane ka time nahi milta ki yaar yeh sab, you don't really have time to process
[Guest]: any of this, right?
[Guest]: And you're having the highest level of density of experiences in your life, right?
[Guest]: And so the intensity is very, very high.
[Guest]: And all of a sudden all of it goes away.
[Guest]: So you don't know who you are, essentially.
[Guest]: And we were certain something of a certain level.
[Guest]: Phir hum Indore mein the, toh waha toh hume feeling of a king aati thi, kyuki hum waha
[Guest]: ke toh sabse badi company the, toh, which is, which is why we were in Indore actually
[Guest]: in the first place.
[Guest]: We, we went there because we said ki yaar saare bade sehro mein itne start-ups huma
[Guest]: toh hum kho jaayenge, can we go to a city where we can build the entire ecosystem and
[Guest]: be the kings of our own world?
[Guest]: And we were, and all of a sudden you are a nobody.
[Guest]: So I think it started with denial, the typical first phase of any grief cycle, I think.
[Guest]: Toh we said, arey, arey aise kaise ho sakta hai, we are witty feet, we'll fight it out,
[Guest]: hum Facebook se ladenge hai, we'll do legal battle, yeh wo sab, humne kiya bhi, we hired
[Guest]: the best of the lawyers and we wrote back and all that stuff.
[Guest]: Do teen maine mein we lost all the money that we had accued in terms of profits.
[Guest]: We even took loans.
[Guest]: You make a lot of foolish decisions in times like this, right?
[Guest]: So kyunki humari books bahut strong thi, toh har bank ne humein unsecured, pre-approved
[Guest]: loan 25 lakh rupee ke dedi hai, humne le liye, some 13-14 banks se yeh saare loans le liye
[Guest]: bhi.
[Guest]: Jo koi basically dera tha, wo sabse le liye.
[Guest]: Teen, chaar crore rupee ke gareeb loans ho gaye.
[Guest]: People who used to have a couple of million dollars in their account as their profits
[Guest]: for now at minus three, three and a half crores, essentially, and with no idea of what to do.
[Guest]: It came to a point where we would probably have to shut down the company, right?
[Guest]: And then all that story of how employees bailed us out, which is why, which was the biggest
[Guest]: validation of that.
[Guest]: We probably built it the right way and also we made a pitch, we did a town hall basically
[Guest]: and we made a pitch to 90 employees that we don't know what to do from here.
[Guest]: But if you believe in us, you stay with us.
[Guest]: We will figure it out what to do from here.
[Guest]: 6 maine ki bet lo hum pe, but humaar pe paise nahi aapko dene ke liye.
[Guest]: You take 25% of your salary, the rest 75%, we will double it and we'll give you as an
[Guest]: equity in the company.
[Guest]: So you become our angel investor.
[Guest]: And this is a pitch to employees in Indore back in 2018 when these things were not so
[Guest]: common, right?
[Guest]: And this was all from that idea of ki yaar, this can't be the climax of my story.
[Guest]: Well, again, that attitude of ki yaar, aise kaise ho sakta hai, meri story, meri picture
[Guest]: yahaan khatam nahi ho rahi hai basically.
[Guest]: Out of 90, 54 people decided to stay back.
[Guest]: And even jo jaare the, us din, wo bechare majboori mein jaare the, they were mostly
[Guest]: the sole earning members in their families and all that stuff, right?
[Guest]: And it was, it was probably the most emotional or second most emotional day of my life.
[Guest]: So much crying and, you know, you don't know what to do with these people who are leaving,
[Guest]: you know why they're leaving and people who are staying, you don't know, like there's
[Guest]: so much weight on your shoulders.
[Guest]: Chogan log bhot hote hain, unki 25% salary bhi bhot hoti hai.
[Guest]: Initially humne aise suchta ki 4-5 log rukh jayenge, toh depressed nahi honge.
[Guest]: We will have a reason to come back to office, we'll do something and all.
[Guest]: 55 logon ke saath, chogan logon ke saath, ab kya karoge basically?
[Guest]: There's a lot of people and I don't have a product, I don't even have an idea what
[Guest]: to do from here, basically.
[Guest]: Toh, but yeah, I think that is what saved the company.
[Guest]: Even those who stayed, they were like, sir, aap chhodo, 25% chhodo, meri paas ek lakh
[Guest]: rupee ki saving hai, meri paas do lakh rupee ki saving hai, main deta hu, hum marne nahi
[Guest]: denge company ko.
[Guest]: One of our guys, I remember this very distinctly, that he had a kid very recently, malar us
[Guest]: time pe and he said, sir, theek hai, hum inna ek kaam karenge, yeh meri salary ka jo
[Guest]: hai.
[Guest]: And, yaar, yeh Indore ki salaries kya hongi, between, malar yeh 20,000 se start hoke, 60-70
[Guest]: thousand upar mein, basically, uske beech ki salaries hai, yeh saari.
[Guest]: Toh, said ki, sir, main ek kaam karenge, hum dood kebal mere bachche ke liye manga lenge
[Guest]: ghar mein, baaki hum cut down kar denge, aur aisi ek doon cheeze usne boli, and like, but
[Guest]: I will stay with you, no matter what, main 25% pe rukunga aapke saath.
[Guest]: I mean, what do you, like, kaise, it was such.
[Guest]: A huge weight, ki yaar, inn logon ke saath main galat hone nahi de sakta kabhi bhi, right?
[Guest]: And I think that became one of the reasons why we survived.
[Guest]: Because it changes the entire vibe, the energy, tells you ki boss, pachpan log aise hain jo
[Guest]: aap pe aap se zyada barusa karte hain.
[Guest]: They believe ki you will not fail, you will do something with your life, toh ab toh karna
[Guest]: toh padhega hi basically yahan se, right, so that, wo sab hua, chalo phir jaise-daise
[Guest]: karke stage ki company mani hai, and one more thing, I am very proud to tell you ki pichle
[Guest]: saal June mein humne un saare employees ko exit diya, as they made some 2x of their investment,
[Guest]: etc.
[Guest]: Main kisi, jab Unicorn bhi banega, aur humare investors 50x bhi banayenge, I don't think
[Guest]: it will ever give me more satisfaction than giving exit to those people, right?
[Guest]: Because hua aise boj utar gaya ki yaar, you know, the grief continued with us I think
[Guest]: throughout.
[Guest]: Bohot saara unprocessed hai abhi bhi, to be honest, you know, December last year, we were
[Guest]: trying to raise a round, last to last year, December 2020, we were trying to raise a series
[Guest]: a round, stage mein us time chal raha tha, sab sahi chal raha tha, humne monetize kiya
[Guest]: nahi tha us time tha, people, every VC that we spoke to said ki Bharat doesn't pay, subscription
[Guest]: chalega hi nahi, possible hi nahi hai, we were just not able to raise.
[Guest]: Humare paas karib 5-6 maine ka paisa bacha tha, and hota gaya na ki 2-4-5-10 log jab
[Guest]: same baat bolte hain, to ek point pe baad it gets into your head, it starts to impact
[Guest]: you, right?
[Guest]: And you start to believe ki yaar, itne smart log, itni baate bol rahe hain, to yaar, kuch
[Guest]: sahi bol rahe honge, you know, they know, they do this for their daily job, to inko
[Guest]: kuch aata hi hoga, and you start to doubt yourself, and that is when all the shit that
[Guest]: you had buried, it all comes out, right?
[Guest]: So hua gaya ki, mere dimaag mein ghus gaya ki yaar, we are, I am not a good entrepreneur,
[Guest]: witty feed band hua, everybody said ki yaar, us samayal, there were a lot of people, people,
[Guest]: there are all kinds of people, right?
[Guest]: So there were a lot of people who said ki, arey toh humein toh pata hi tha, hai toh fluke
[Guest]: hai, hum toh pehli bolte the, kuch boat hoga, kuch ghochi hoga, when Facebook does something,
[Guest]: everybody say that Facebook probably, facebook aise kyun hi karega, chote wale ki kisi ko
[Guest]: nahi, nobody would say ki, my story is the right story, until unless I prove it at some
[Guest]: point, right?
[Guest]: Everybody would say ki, Facebook aise kisi ka kyun band karega, inkar kiya, toh I was
[Amit Varma]: the culprit basically in everybody's mind.
[Amit Varma]: Kiya ki, lekin by the way, why did they shut you down?
[Guest]: Yeah, I'll probably come to that as a follow up, right?
[Guest]: So everybody thought ki yaar yeh toh, and some people said it was a fluke, anyways dekho
[Guest]: hum toh bolte the, inkar kuch nahi hoga.
[Guest]: Ab jab wo 6 maine ka paisa bacha aur paisa raise nahi ho para tha, toh dimaag mein kya
[Guest]: thoughts aane lage, ki yaar toh stage bhi band hoega, and then everybody who said so will
[Guest]: basically be right, and they'll say humne toh bola hi tha, yeh inko toh aata hi nahi
[Guest]: hai kuch basically, right?
[Guest]: And it got into my head, it got into my head so much, aise poore poore din, dupair mein
[Guest]: 2 baje, 3 baje, neech aise ghoomta rahata tha garden mein, like a crazy guy who doesn't
[Guest]: know, main kuch samajh mein aata tha kya soch raha hoon, aur saare din main ek se sochta
[Guest]: rahata tha ki yaar accha toh band hoegi, yeh toh confirm ho gaya hai, mujhe kaun se job
[Guest]: milegi?
[Guest]: Who will give me a job?
[Guest]: The sense of worthlessness for self was so high, that I used to feel ki, yaar mujhe nokri
[Guest]: kaun dega?
[Guest]: Aur main kya nokri karunga, mujhe toh kuch aati hi nahi hai, mujhe kaun se cheez, main
[Guest]: expert kis cheez ka hoon, main se kuch bhi nahi aata hai.
[Guest]: You are basically jack of all trades as an entrepreneur and you are master of none, toh
[Guest]: tumhe koi PM ki job bhi tumhe koi entry level milegi, milegi toh product manager ki, tumhe
[Guest]: koi developer tum ho nahi, CEO tumhe koi banayega nahi, toh tum what will you do basically?
[Guest]: I just couldn't think of a single job that I could get and poore din main yeh sochta
[Guest]: rahata tha, poore din, all the unprocessed grief of witty feed not making it came out
[Guest]: basically.
[Guest]: And it took a lot to come out of this, thankfully we shifted from Indore to Noida around that
[Guest]: time, 1st of April last year I shifted here, changed the energy, changed the vibe and we
[Guest]: launched subscriptions 10th of April, thank god it worked out and that gave me the energy
[Guest]: to be able to raise the round in next, within next 2 months I raised some million dollars
[Guest]: or so and then we survived and like it all is going great now and all, touch wood.
[Guest]: Point is yaar, aise like you said ki aisa aisa where do you even bring the motivation
[Guest]: from etc.
[Guest]: The truth is that I am not always motivated, truth is that there are times when I feel
[Guest]: like worthless piece of shit, there are times when I feel like giving up and I am like what
[Guest]: the hell, why don't I even do a job itself and all right.
[Guest]: But then what motivates you and what brings you back to doing it all over again is the
[Guest]: reminder of why did you start in the 1st place right and you remember that did you start
[Guest]: it for the money, did you start it for, why did you start it right and you started because
[Guest]: you want to do something good for people, you are able to do that basically.
[Guest]: There are, there is an entire state which is coming out of inferiority complex based
[Guest]: on their language because you created a platform in Haryanvi.
[Guest]: The youth, entire Haryanvi youth today are you just call and tell us that you know that
[Guest]: because there is stage today I don't feel bad in speaking in Haryanvi and I think about
[Guest]: that and I am like what the hell, we have to do this, you know if not who, if not us
[Guest]: who, who will do it, no one is doing it, so we have to do it basically and I think just
[Guest]: thinking like this, all this motivation porn, success porn comes to mind from here and there,
[Guest]: do something and then start and I think success is the biggest motivator, in entrepreneurship
[Guest]: you have to look for the ropes right.
[Guest]: I always say that sorrows come in a truck and happiness comes in small quantities always.
[Guest]: Success is also like that, failure happens in one year, it is clear, it is over, VT feed
[Guest]: is there one day in the morning and it is not existing, but success is never like that,
[Guest]: success does not happen overnight, success does not happen at once, success comes in
[Guest]: small quantities, right, so you need to be able to learn to identify those ropes, hold
[Guest]: on to them and like catch the other, one after the other, one after the other and like keep
[Guest]: climbing up.
[Guest]: So when there is a spiral down, now at least the way I, the way I have learned to handle
[Guest]: it is that I acknowledge it, I do not fight it, I have realized that motivation is not
[Guest]: a linear thing, there are days when you feel amazingly motivated and you should use that
[Guest]: to do everything and then there are weeks when you will feel really low and it is okay.
[Guest]: So I do not fight too much with myself on the days when I am feeling low and I tell
[Guest]: myself that it is okay, it will also pass and basically it has happened so many times,
[Guest]: so now it does not feel like, now it feels okay, I know you are feeling very bad right
[Guest]: now, but you have to do a little self-soothing that it has happened many times, we will feel
[Guest]: better tomorrow.
[Guest]: So you look forward to tomorrow and one of those days turns out to be a good day, something
[Guest]: good happens and one good thing leads to another, I have told my team that one good thing leads
[Guest]: to another.
[Guest]: Look for one thing, when something is not going well, just look for one thing that is
[Guest]: going good and build on that, so everything happens slowly.
[Amit Varma]: And from where I am sitting, it seems to me that what you described with your 54 employees
[Amit Varma]: is such a big success, I mean you were earlier talking about your anger issues and whatever,
[Amit Varma]: but you know, 54 people making that kind of a choice just shows that it did not matter,
[Amit Varma]: that overall there was something else that you did right.
[Amit Varma]: So that is quite amazing.
[Amit Varma]: Just to go back to the smaller question of why did Facebook do what they did and also
[Amit Varma]: the larger question that brings about is the power that platforms have, like as someone
[Amit Varma]: who cares deeply about the creator economy, this also worries me, that the way the tech
[Amit Varma]: ecosystem has evolved is that you practically have, you know, monopolies in their domains
[Amit Varma]: of Facebook, Twitter, Twitch and so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: And if a platform tomorrow makes a small change in an algorithm, a creator's entire, you know,
[Amit Varma]: revenue model could fall apart or a business's model could fall apart as happened to you.
[Amit Varma]: So is this something you think about, given that earlier you said if, you know, content
[Amit Varma]: is king, distribution is God, distribution to platforms key through.
[Guest]: So what are your thoughts?
[Guest]: So let me answer the what happened to Witty Feed first and then I'll tell you my views
[Guest]: on it.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: So not that these companies tell you what they do, why they do, how they do it, etc.
[Guest]: These companies operate as a dictatorship type, because they have monopolies, they can
[Guest]: do what they're doing.
[Guest]: So these people pass orders and you live in their world and you just have to accept it.
[Guest]: You can't do much about it.
[Guest]: You can't really fight them.
[Guest]: And that's the reality of the world, right?
[Guest]: So just like that, one fine day we got this notice in our inbox.
[Guest]: And before even we read that, we discovered the notice later, before that, all our properties
[Guest]: basically started getting deleted from the platform, including my own, like founder's
[Guest]: profile, even our wife's profile got deleted, all employees, basically everything about
[Guest]: Witty Feed was removed and so on and so forth, right?
[Guest]: We never got an official reason.
[Guest]: Official reason was that you violated some of our platform policies, which is a black
[Guest]: hole, right?
[Guest]: You don't know what policies, how do I even know, right?
[Guest]: And I'm a large company, I'm giving you so much business, there are 150 people, it's
[Guest]: a business, real business, lives are on the other side of that email, right?
[Guest]: So you need to talk to me.
[Guest]: If I'm violating, I'm not a criminal, you need to talk to me, you need to tell me, these
[Guest]: are the problems, I will fix them, right?
[Guest]: So but then again, over time, what we discovered, the actual issue was that 2018 was also the
[Guest]: year of Cambridge Analytica in US.
[Guest]: And from a very American point of view, the entire issue was non-American companies influencing
[Guest]: American voters using Facebook as a platform, right?
[Guest]: We were a non-American company, we were reaching out to every third American voter every month,
[Guest]: that was the scale that we had 60 million American users, right?
[Guest]: And we were using Facebook as the primary source of distribution, right?
[Guest]: Now Facebook was under a lot of pressure, Mark was going through Senate hearings, all
[Guest]: of that stuff, right?
[Guest]: We wanted to show some action, we wanted to show them that we are doing something, basically,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: Now you can't do anything about BuzzFeed, you can't do anything about the other companies
[Guest]: from New York.
[Guest]: If you kill a company which is based out of Indore and nobody has even heard of, who cares?
[Guest]: And the action, however, is 120 million users, 65,000 influencers, you show like a huge
[Guest]: action, right?
[Guest]: And no one will care, basically.
[Guest]: Same company, if owned by some American, based out of New York, the outcome would have been
[Guest]: very, very different, basically, right?
[Guest]: So that is what happened, actually.
[Guest]: I think it also has a lot of unspoken racism, unspoken, how these large companies, especially
[Guest]: US companies, look at Asian companies and Indian companies, especially Indian entrepreneurs
[Guest]: and there's a lot of inbuilt discrimination that exists over there, the superiority complex
[Guest]: and underlying issues, basically, when you peel the onion, you will find that there are
[Guest]: so many layers to the entire issue.
[Guest]: It was just convenient for them to kill us.
[Guest]: And that is why we got killed, not because we deserved or we did something wrong or anything
[Guest]: like that.
[Guest]: It's just that because it was convenient for Facebook to kill us, they killed it.
[Guest]: And there were zero consequences that they had to face, right?
[Guest]: So it's as simple as that.
[Guest]: Now, my views on distribution and platforms and all, right?
[Guest]: So one of the reasons we decided to build Stage as an OTT platform, an app-based platform
[Guest]: is that at least to some extent, we remove that dependency, that once you have a user
[Guest]: on your app, at least now they're your user, there is still dependency of play store distributions
[Guest]: and all policies like you have to pay 30% on cart and all that stuff, right?
[Guest]: But and which are very, I don't know what's the right word, but wrong policies, right?
[Guest]: I think, so we reduced that to a large extent by being an app-based player this time, like
[Guest]: having our own and companies like Dream 11, etc.
[Guest]: Because of policies, you have shown that you can build a user base without having to distribute
[Guest]: on play stores and so on and so forth, right?
[Guest]: So which is why we choose to build this.
[Guest]: There is a saying, that even if you drink milk, you will still have to swallow it.
[Guest]: So it happened with us, at least I am never going to trust these platforms for distribution
[Guest]: because even today, I feel that Google will wake up one day and say, no, we have banned
[Guest]: you from play stores, we can't do anything.
[Guest]: And it has happened to so many companies.
[Guest]: Even companies like PTM, such a large company, it happened to them, right?
[Guest]: It's probably the influence of VSS in some way, etc.
[Guest]: And like a lot of media buzz around it, etc.
[Guest]: And like a certain narrative that got pulled in, which is why Google came on the back foot
[Guest]: and they restored it.
[Guest]: If it can happen to them, as long as I am small, it can happen to me anytime and anything.
[Guest]: So I think these platforms need to re-look into these things.
[Guest]: And if they will not, we are already seeing the winds of change and these guys will lose.
[Guest]: There has to be a point where creators will realize that and creators will start to figure
[Guest]: out their own, this thing and they will lose on that over time, right?
[Guest]: So anyone, all creators, I still tell everyone, you are a YouTuber, you are all this, but
[Guest]: the problem is that you are on the mercy of these platforms, they can kill you whenever
[Guest]: they want.
[Guest]: Google kills SEO people every third month, right?
[Guest]: We know that.
[Guest]: And it's like a known industry accepted fact that traffic will go bad every third month
[Guest]: and then you have to figure out again what is new, basically, right?
[Guest]: Similarly, there were so many entrepreneurs on Facebook, so many companies like ours,
[Guest]: all died.
[Guest]: There was a very viral thread recently by the founder of Little Things, which was also
[Guest]: killed in a similar manner.
[Guest]: BuzzFeed, which was more than a billion dollar company at one point in time, their total
[Guest]: valuation of the company is less than the money that they raised for simple reason because
[Guest]: Facebook killed them.
[Guest]: Reach is gone, basically, traffic is gone, everything is gone, essentially.
[Guest]: So I still don't know the answer to what to do from here.
[Guest]: I am trying my best to ensure that my dependency on them is bare minimum.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me about stage now, like, how did you think of stage and what I find so interesting
[Amit Varma]: and also impressive that you could then have the courage to follow through on it, is that
[Amit Varma]: it's going against so many of so much of what the industry is doing in terms of being as
[Amit Varma]: hyper local as you are, that there is Haryanvi, there is Rajasthani, you know, where people
[Amit Varma]: could even argue that there is no ecosystem, what will you do in this, you know, and even
[Amit Varma]: against the conventional knowledge of India versus Bharat, where, you know, the assumption
[Amit Varma]: is that it's only the very top, which I also believed until I, you know, heard otherwise,
[Amit Varma]: while researching you, that, you know, it's a very top layer of elites like us who can
[Amit Varma]: actually spend money via the market.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, Sajid Bhai of Bloom Ventures is one of your funders, Sajid had come on
[Amit Varma]: the show, and he had once written an influential article on this, I think, and had broken it
[Amit Varma]: down that most of India is basically like sub-Saharan Africa, but what your venture
[Amit Varma]: seems to say, and what you're saying, not by words, but by actions, is that no, Bharat
[Amit Varma]: has money as well, if you give value, people will give money, just in the same way that
[Amit Varma]: your parents, even though they were in a village, sent you to a private school, because there
[Amit Varma]: was value, they gave money.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, so tell me a little bit about, you know, how did you conceive of stage?
[Amit Varma]: And how did all these beliefs, ki Bharat will pay, that we should be hyperlocal, how did
[Amit Varma]: all this come about?
[Guest]: Yeah, see, the idea of stage came from, it is rooted into those two same common beliefs
[Guest]: that the power of content as a medium of mass influence and distribution as the real game.
[Guest]: So we knew that we want to build a content company again, and we knew that we are going
[Guest]: to do things differently in terms of distribution this time, right, and whatever we did wrong
[Guest]: with Witty Feed, basically, one thing that we this time wanted to change was the fact
[Guest]: that we wanted to build it for Bharat, we made it for Americans, the extreme one end
[Guest]: of the spectrum.
[Guest]: And now we want to do the other end of the spectrum on internet, which is the Bharat
[Guest]: audience, right?
[Guest]: Reason being because when we were making Witty Feed, and this entire Jio story was unfolding
[Guest]: in India, we always felt very frustrated and jealousy with the kind of companies that were
[Guest]: coming up and building for Bharat and we felt that what are they doing, what are they making,
[Guest]: we can do a much better job.
[Guest]: And they're not doing it the right way.
[Guest]: And so we should do it, basically, but no one pivots the 40 crore revenue of a company
[Guest]: basically.
[Guest]: They are making it, let them make it, what can I do, I am doing it, so I will keep running
[Guest]: my company.
[Guest]: Now we had a chance, basically, right?
[Guest]: And so we decided to go back and build it for Bharat.
[Guest]: We were thinking about, okay, what are the problems in content in Bharat, right?
[Guest]: And the top five content companies, back in the day, which were solving for Bharat were
[Guest]: all Chinese, all UGC content companies, and all of them used a huge amount of sexually
[Guest]: explicit content as their actual growth hack, right?
[Guest]: So TikTok, Likey, Hello, Bego, these types of companies were basically going on at that
[Guest]: time, right?
[Guest]: All of them were Chinese and UGC and sexual content.
[Guest]: I said, if I am saying that I am Bharat, my family is Bharat, then how is that, do they
[Guest]: want to consume only this kind of content?
[Guest]: The question was, what do I want to see for my family?
[Guest]: And the answer to that was, obviously, no, they want to consume better content, premium
[Guest]: content, sensible content, but unfortunately, it does not exist, nobody is creating that
[Guest]: for Bharat.
[Guest]: And that is where we figured out this problem statement that, that if we could build a premium
[Guest]: and sensible content company for Bharat, it is a complete white space, it is a very large
[Guest]: opportunity and you can build a very large company here.
[Guest]: Now, the moment you say premium, you cannot say UGC.
[Guest]: So if you make UGC, then basically the same nonsense content will come, so we said, okay,
[Guest]: remove UGC.
[Guest]: There are very few options in PGC.
[Guest]: You can build a news company or make something like VTV or make something like a news channel
[Guest]: and then make OTT, basically, VTV got eliminated because of whatever reasons, news, because
[Guest]: again, where will you do its distribution, Facebook, Google, it will be on all of this.
[Guest]: OTT made more sense because one, it was as much a tech play as content, so it connected
[Guest]: to us.
[Guest]: If we make app-based, then the distribution will be ours this time, we will own the user,
[Guest]: whatever we acquire, it will be ours.
[Guest]: The problem with Fitivit was that we used to acquire 120 million every month and none
[Guest]: of it was ours.
[Guest]: All of them were the same, our returning user was 60-70%, but we had to acquire it every
[Guest]: month, basically.
[Guest]: So here, if we acquire it once, they are ours, basically, if we can retain them, so we said,
[Guest]: let's build an OTT for India, so Netflix for India solution came out, but the problem,
[Guest]: the moment we said it, we kind of got scared a little, because that means there are about
[Guest]: 20-25 active OTT platforms in India, small and big, you can mix them all, if you go to
[Guest]: sleep at night and ask, they will say, we are building Netflix for India.
[Guest]: Everybody claims that only, you can ask SonyLibs, Hotstar, G5, All Balaji, anyone, everybody
[Guest]: will claim the same thing.
[Guest]: So we said, what are we making here, in such a crowded market, and every single player
[Guest]: literally is owned by an incumbent, is a large production house, a large company backed by
[Guest]: some media, so what are we going to do here?
[Guest]: We went back to our village, literally, and one of the things that has helped me throughout
[Guest]: our story, all three founders, that we always remained an outsider, in WittyFeed also, we
[Guest]: were able to do whatever we could, because we did not know that it was not possible,
[Guest]: we did not know that a company is not made in Indore, for that you have to go to Bangalore,
[Guest]: you have to do a startup, so we did not know that we should not do revenue, we did not
[Guest]: know that profitability is not looked at as a good thing in the VC circles, we did not
[Guest]: know that we cannot make global media from India, we did not know all this, so we did
[Guest]: it, then it happened, now in the same way, in OTT, we were still an outsider, basically,
[Guest]: we did not know what all could not be done, which is said by the book, that all this is
[Guest]: not possible, right?
[Guest]: So, our entire life, our entrepreneurial journey has been all about common sense, what does
[Guest]: make sense here, so we said, on one hand, I am saying that my family needs premium sensible
[Guest]: content and not, on the other hand, I am saying that there are 27 OTT, so where is the problem?
[Guest]: What is the unsolved part?
[Guest]: We went back to our village, literally, and there we did some research, understood, what
[Guest]: we discovered became the unique insight on which we built this company, which is that
[Guest]: you look at all the OTTs in India, in the name of vernacular content, all of them do
[Guest]: language-based content, Hindi, Tamil, Telugu, Marathi, Punjabi, Bangla, Gujarati, Kannada,
[Guest]: Malayalam, you will get all this, I grew up speaking Haryanvi, Haryanvi is not a language
[Guest]: and there was no content in Haryanvi, there was no app in Haryanvi, nothing, so I said,
[Guest]: this is it, this is not happening, both are right, there are 27 OTTs, but nobody is doing
[Guest]: Haryanvi.
[Guest]: Why is no one doing it?
[Guest]: Which is the pursuit of trying to figure this out, we found that Haryanvi is a dialect and
[Guest]: not a language, before that I did not know all this, I spoke in the vernacular and I
[Guest]: read the language, but never thought of it in a practical sense, right, and this discrimination
[Guest]: by our constitution between a dialect and a language leads to a lot of things.
[Guest]: Dialects don't have their own scripts, so they don't have their own literature, so they
[Guest]: don't have their own cinema, so they don't have their own industry, Boliyaan literally
[Guest]: Boli jatiye, likhi nahi jatiye, basically, lipi nahi hoti hunki apni, toh we said ki
[Guest]: boss Haryana mein toh hai, is it a Haryana only problem?
[Guest]: So you go to Rajasthan, people speak Marwadi, Sikhavati, Haruti, Mewati, depending on the
[Guest]: region that you come from, UP speaks Braj, Bundeli, Avdi, Bhojpuri, Kannoji, Bihar speaks
[Guest]: Mathli, Maghai, Bhojpuri, Angika and Bajjika, then North toh pura cover hogaya, North mein
[Guest]: toh Boliyaan hai, then we said, kya yeh North only problem hai?
[Guest]: You go to the entire coastal region of Maharashtra, Karnataka and Goa speaks Konkani, Konkani
[Guest]: is a language recognised as a language because of Goa, but still there is hardly any content
[Guest]: in Konkani and there is a very large population that speaks it, Gujarat mein Gujrati hai lekin
[Guest]: Gujrati ke andar Kathiawadi aur Kachi hai, Maharashtra has Kulapuri, Malwani, Telangana
[Guest]: and Andhra were divided, one of the big reason was that they speak two different versions
[Guest]: of Telugu, there is Tullu and there are different Sindhi and bohot saari aisi phir chhoti languages
[Guest]: hain jaise Assamese, Oriya, the entire North East, Nepali and yeh sab basic, point being
[Guest]: that humne yeh discover kiya that in India, language is an urban concept, seher mein kya
[Guest]: hai na, aap kahin se ho, main kahin se ho, hume Hindi aur English samajh mein aati hai
[Guest]: toh hum yeh use kar rahe hain, main Haryanvi mein nahi bol sakta hai kyunki aapko samajh
[Guest]: mein nahi aayega aur aap whatever dialect you may speak, you can't speak in that because
[Guest]: I will not understand right, so we need common ground and so urban places, cities are about
[Guest]: languages, but the moment you go beyond urban settlements, everyone speaks in dialects,
[Guest]: aap Gurgaon se 20 km andar chale jao, aapko Hindi bolne wala vekti milega nahi, for me
[Guest]: to learn Hindi, to speak clean Hindi was as big a task as it was to learn English, jaise
[Guest]: hum Neeraj Chopra ki hi baat kar rahe the right, he speaks his Hindi with a very Haryanvi
[Guest]: accent and I am so glad that he embraces his own identity so well because I didn't, growing
[Guest]: up hume lagta tha ki hume Haryanvi was supposed to be a bad thing, I used to literally scold
[Guest]: and beat my siblings for speaking in Haryanvi, toh hum hamare dimaag me itna inferiority
[Guest]: bhara jaata hai na iske upar, point being that the insight yeh mila ki in India language
[Guest]: is an urban concept, the moment you go beyond urban settlements, everybody speaks in dialects
[Guest]: and so if there is a true hyper local content company to be built for Bharat, for the next
[Guest]: billion people, something that will disrupt Bollywood, something that will be built bottom
[Guest]: up for them and not with a top-down approach ki ek film banayega Bombay aur poori desh
[Guest]: ko vahi dekhna hai, something that will not bastardize the Haryanvi spoken by the characters
[Guest]: in Dangal because it has to be relevant to somebody in Maharashtra also and so it has
[Guest]: to be a dialect-based content company and not a language-based sort of a platform.
[Guest]: So we decided to build the most hyper local content company ever built, a dialect-based
[Guest]: OTT for Bharat basically, again humein nahi pata tha ki aisa nahi ho sakta hai, so bas
[Guest]: chale banane aur ho gaya over time, challenges uske apne rahe, maybe I can talk about that
[Guest]: also a little bit, teen parts mein challenges the, everyone said that ki kaun download garega
[Guest]: Haryanvi ke liye app, aur kar bhi lega toh kitne logonge, so demand and depth as one
[Guest]: problem, second people said there is no existing supply and which means there are no existing
[Guest]: creators, so how will you build the supply basically, so supply as an issue and third
[Guest]: monetization, Bharat paise nahi deta hai basically, ek ek karke humne teenon ko solve kiya, sabse
[Guest]: pehle demand ko solve kiya, so we launched with a free app in the first 18 months, toh
[Guest]: paise the nahi, content banane ke liye, PGC content banane ke liye, pre-request hai ki
[Guest]: aapko paise invest karne padheni hai, right, so you have to figure out ki kaunsa content
[Guest]: mein jo saste mein banega, toh artist based content, comedy, poetry, storytelling, folk,
[Guest]: nokkar naatak, yeh ek toh dialects mein naturally exist karta hai, doosra bahut sasta hota hai,
[Guest]: teesra hamara original idea hi keval artist based content banane ka tha, which is why
[Guest]: the name is stage of the platform, because humein lagta tha ki, dekho jo mainstream media
[Guest]: hai, wo toh khareeda jaata hai, bechara jaata hai, uski apni ek alag samasyaayin hain, uske
[Guest]: upar pressure aata hai, yeh aata hai, wo aata hai, toh phir historically, matlab Raja Maharaja
[Guest]: ho ke time se leke abhi tak, who are the, kaunse type ka content hai, jo krantiyan khari karta
[Guest]: hai, revolution kahaan se aata hai, change kahaan se, chingariyan kahaan se banti hai,
[Guest]: and it has always been the artists, you know, chahe wo comedy, poetry karke karte hain,
[Guest]: wo folk ki form mein karte hain, matlab jeetne wale ki kahaniyaan toh itihaas batata hai,
[Guest]: par haarne wale ki kahani kaun batata hai, itihaas amesa jeetne wale ki kahani batata
[Guest]: hai, haarne wale ki kahani kisne batayi hai, wo folk ki form mein bahar aati hai, geet
[Guest]: bante hain uske, uske upar koi kavita likhi jaati hai, uske upar koi kuch aur hota hai,
[Guest]: aisi cheejein hoti hain, art bante hain, art has always preserved our history in the most,
[Guest]: this thing, so we said ki yaar, agar dialects ka Netflix banega, toh wo artist based hoga,
[Guest]: basically, ye artist log hain jo zinda rakhte hain, toh hum agar genuinely ek aisa platform
[Guest]: banana jaate hain, jo revolution khada kare, jo ek surrogate tariqa ho sake, poori janta
[Guest]: ko jagane ka, toh it has to be ek artist ka Netflix hona chahiye basically, so which is
[Guest]: how the stage, which was the original idea of stage, so we started with that content,
[Guest]: within the first 18 months, 18 months the app was free, we had 1.5 million downloads
[Guest]: just from Haryana, Haryana se start kiya because of course my home dialect yeh, wo sab right,
[Guest]: 1.5 million downloads the, 15 lakh download, toh demand, depth, yeh sab toh solve hogaya,
[Guest]: but we also realized ki log is content ka paisa nahi denge, kyunki and see this is where
[Guest]: going back to what you said, ki ye contradictions hain life ke right, you start with something
[Guest]: and then you realize ki bhai, isko sustain karna hai toh kuch aur karna padega right,
[Guest]: I started with an NGO and then I started a business, I started with the idea of building
[Guest]: a surrogate media, like a platform for artists, etc, patna realized ki boss iska paisa nahi
[Guest]: denge log, kyunki ye na, sabko lagta hai ki ye content YouTube pe mil jayega aage peechay,
[Guest]: even when it was exclusive, artist based content ki samjhya ye hai ki logon ko lagta hai ki
[Guest]: YouTube pe aajata hai, doosri uske samjhya ye hai ki aap kuch bhi koshish kar lo, comedian
[Guest]: aapka perform kar raha hai, aap kya paanch camera laga loge, phir uske aage ek jaga khada
[Guest]: ho ki perform karega, toh uski perceived production value jo hai na, wo bahut low hoti hai, uske
[Guest]: liye paisa lena bahut muskil kaam hai, which is when we realized that ki people will pay
[Guest]: only for the established content formats which are, and longer content formats like movies
[Guest]: and web series and so on and so forth, and so came the part of solving for the supply,
[Guest]: ki jo supply humne banayi hai, usse liye paisa nahi milega, supply ke liye aapko jo typical
[Guest]: entertainment ke supply hoti hai, wo banaani padegi.
[Guest]: So we literally jumpstarted a local Bollywood in Haryana, we literally created a poori industry
[Guest]: banayi iskrayat se, one of the cliche insights that you, when you work there, you realize
[Guest]: is that talent is universal, but opportunity is not. There are so many people who want
[Guest]: to create great content, who wanted to make movies and so on, like Haryanvi mein unko
[Guest]: kaam karna hai, script likhi hui hai, ya kuch kiya hua hai, lekin platform nahi, Haryanvi
[Guest]: mein film banali toh release kaun karega, paisa laga diya toh recover kahan se hoga.
[Guest]: Right, so we basically went on the ground, worked with these people, incubated them,
[Guest]: helped them become creators and producers, and pehli web series humne sanction ki Haryana
[Guest]: ki, jaise hi humne pehli web series app pe dali, the engagements skyrocketed.
[Guest]: Even by the way, aaj, something that I am most proud to tell is that Haryana today has
[Guest]: a very flourishing industry, locally, we very fondly call it Harrywood, aur 25 production
[Guest]: houses hunge kam se kam bhi yahan pe, more than 1500 people have jobs directly and indirectly
[Guest]: because of what we have been able to create, and reverse migration ho raha hai.
[Guest]: Abhi pehle kya hota tha, kisi Haryanvi ko agar entertainment mein kuch karna hai, toh
[Guest]: woh basically Bombay jaata tha, wahan Bollywood mein struggle karta tha, ab kya ho raha hai,
[Guest]: they are like, yaar, humare gaon mein filme ban rahi hain, aur hum yahaan struggle kar
[Guest]: rahe hain, they are coming back, plus Bombay se aadmi wapas aata toh usko ijjat bhi zyada
[Guest]: milti hai, ki bhai usko aata hai, Bombay se aaya hai, seekh ke aaya hai, right, so kaafi
[Guest]: amazing ye ho raha hai, jaise hi humne web series dali, engagements skyrocketed, which
[Guest]: is when we knew that people will pay.
[Guest]: Answering your last part of the question, which is that, how did I know that people
[Guest]: will pay, and why did I believe in that and all, see, gaon mein jab aap bade ho toh, toh
[Guest]: un logon ko aap samashte ho, wohin bade ho, yeh sab hua, right, so like you said, my
[Guest]: father sent me to a private school, yaar, papa jo grocery store chalate the, kirane
[Guest]: ki dukaan, we used to sell Pepsi, Coke, Darbar, Lifebuoy, Lux, sab hum beshte the yeh sab,
[Guest]: aur bhi lot more other brands, it has never been about that they don't want to pay, it
[Guest]: has always been about that, have you created enough value for them, aur entrepreneurs
[Guest]: ko sath, problem kya unfortunately, sabko lagta hai ki Bharat pay nahi karega, toh
[Guest]: ek urban, aur entrepreneur banta hai kaun hai normally, thode se sehri log bante hain,
[Guest]: yaar at least sehr mein aane ke baad insan bante hain, gaon mein baith ke toh koi bana
[Guest]: nahi raha hai company hain normally, toh ek urban bias ban jaata hai, and easy way out
[Guest]: is, ki sehr ke liye banao, log paisa dete hain yahan pe, toh everybody ends up creating
[Guest]: for the cities, for the urban audience, and then they feel entitled ke, arre app hi toh
[Guest]: hai kya, phir aap bhi use kar lo, aur Bharat ko phir milti utran, Bharat ko milta second
[Guest]: class experience, and which is why they have not been successful in monetizing Bharat user,
[Guest]: and humne day zero pe bola ki yaar, we will build for everyone minus the top 10%, top
[Guest]: 10% Delhi ka ho, Bombay ka ho, ya mere gaon ka ho, uske liye nahi banana hai, which is
[Guest]: why we had the courage to build it in dialects, right, toh humein lagta tha yaar log karenge
[Guest]: paisa pay, humne unke liye truly value create ki hai, and April 2021 mein, from a fully
[Guest]: free app, we became a fully paid app, and the response has been phenomenal, abhi 1,10,000,
[Guest]: 1,15,000 paying subscribers hain, just from Haryana, 400 rupiah dete hain saal ka, which
[Guest]: is also typically the rate at any other OTT, even humara minimum 200 rupiah, typically
[Guest]: 30-40 rupiah, 50 rupiah hota hai maine ka, OTT's ka, baaki OTT's ka, humara minimum
[Guest]: 200 rupiah hai, 3 maine ke liye, and we got phenomenal response, 8-10,000 naye subscriber
[Guest]: har maine aate hain Haryana se, and, matlab people love the fact that we've been able
[Guest]: to do what we've been able to do, and we've found a meaning, larger meaning when the youth
[Guest]: came and told us, and that became the mission of the company today, is that, logon ne mein
[Guest]: bataya ki yaar, Haryanvi bolne mein sharam aati thi pehle, itna inferiority complex,
[Guest]: itna logon ko, logon na, agar mai abhi Haryanvi mein podcast karunga toh logon ko lagta ki
[Guest]: anpad hai, gamaar hai, gaon ka hai, isko aata nahi hai, kahin sahar mein aap bol nahi sakte,
[Guest]: right, and so imagine what it does to people jo jindagi mein kebhal Haryanvi bolte hain,
[Guest]: kaise aap agar mere ghar aoge na Amit, and you're sitting in the living room on, in my
[Guest]: own house, on my sofa, my father will not sit there, just he will not sit there, he
[Guest]: will say, arre nahi nahi, aap log bade legal hoga, aap log baithiye, mai kya karunga yaan,
[Guest]: he will just feel so inferior by the fact that you will, you and me will end up talking in
[Guest]: Hindi or English, and he will just not feel comfortable there.
[Guest]: Imagine what it does to this entire set of people who only grow up speaking in their
[Guest]: dialects, and they're felt inferior, they're made to feel inferior because they speak in
[Guest]: a certain way, which is borderline criminal, in my understanding, right, and these people
[Guest]: came and told us that, kya hota tha na ki app pe log aate, 5 star reviews dekhe likhte,
[Guest]: Jai Haryana, Jai Haryanvi, aapne maari culture ko bacha liya, aapne maari boli ko bacha liya,
[Guest]: and which is when by talking to them we understood ki yaar, our true mission is actually to restore
[Guest]: the pride and the dignity of the dialects, their, the respect, the pride and the dignity
[Guest]: of the dialects and cultures back into them, basically. That's the real product that is
[Amit Varma]: happening because of what we're able to do. No, this is, I can't tell you how inspiring
[Amit Varma]: this is. I hope many, many people are listening to this and, you know, feeling like they should
[Amit Varma]: do the same for their dialects. Like I, you know, when, when we fixed our episode, I sent
[Amit Varma]: the link to download the app to a bunch of my friends, and I said, please download, tell me
[Amit Varma]: what your experience is. And one of them, shout out to Kumar, just sort of wrote back today to
[Amit Varma]: say he was so blown away. And one of the things he was blown away by is ki ye jo saare artist hai,
[Amit Varma]: he said ki maine inka kabhi naam nahi suna hai, maine inka kaam kabhi nahi dekha hai,
[Amit Varma]: Bollywood mein, you know, nobody is familiar to me. So all of these people, the fact that
[Amit Varma]: they have a platform, the fact that they have a stage to, you know, so you've created a new
[Amit Varma]: ecosystem. And when you create a new ecosystem, you expand the culture. Like one of my worries
[Amit Varma]: that I've discussed on the show, and I feel I've spoken with various people about whether it is
[Amit Varma]: happening to languages, is homogenization. Because kya ho daana ki Hindi hai, Hindi ke itne saare
[Amit Varma]: dialects hai, lekin gradually, the smaller ones start disappearing and Hindi becomes everything,
[Amit Varma]: especially because India is a rapidly urbanizing country. And, and it's such a loss because there
[Amit Varma]: is such a rich heritage there, that is kind of gone. So I'm just sort of blown away by what you're
[Amit Varma]: doing. My next question is this, that at one level, like I completely agree with your disdain
[Amit Varma]: of the top down way of thinking and the top down content creation jaise Bollywood se hota hai ki
[Amit Varma]: Bombay se banayenge, poora desh dekhega and all of that. And that was actually one of the reasons I
[Amit Varma]: love TikTok when it came out, like Chinese company, it was a huge leveler, it was a huge leveler,
[Amit Varma]: because any people across the country in villages, people of alternate sexualities, people who were
[Amit Varma]: otherwise oppressed and marginal, who could never have access to a platform, could suddenly just
[Amit Varma]: turn their phone around and shoot a video of themselves and put it up. And I thought that
[Amit Varma]: was incredibly empowering. So at one level, I understand where you come from when you say ki
[Amit Varma]: user generated content can only go so far. But at another level, I feel that that is also a kind of
[Amit Varma]: bottom up. You know, your artists that you have access to also is still a limited pool. And,
[Amit Varma]: you know, user generated, maybe I see sort of a lot of hope there, like most of the content I
[Amit Varma]: consume on YouTube is actually user generated. Absolutely, you know, so I so I agree with you
[Guest]: on that. And I have nothing against UGC, by the way, there. We've been debating an idea
[Guest]: internally of having a UGC section on our own app also, by the way. And, and so what I meant
[Guest]: when I was explaining why not UGC, because the the way these, especially the Chinese apps were
[Guest]: using UGC was in the name of UGC, they were essentially seeding a huge amount of sexually
[Guest]: explicit content and calling it UGC and using that as the actual growth hack, right. So there were a
[Guest]: lot of amazing things about TikTok and it brought out a amazing set of influencers and creators and
[Guest]: so many talented people out, right. And we heard such amazing stories because of TikTok and short
[Guest]: video apps, right. So I agree with you on that. Absolutely. And just that they this needs to be
[Guest]: done with the right intent. UGC platforms are amazing, but need to be done with the right
[Guest]: intent. YouTube has done a fairly good job. There are so many creators, UGC creators would
[Guest]: who become big creators because of YouTube. Even there are some newer kind of platforms which are
[Guest]: doing a good job. Just say the Indian versions, for example, are not so bad to be honest. See
[Guest]: Chinese apps, the problem was that they basically had zero accountability, right. There was no fear
[Guest]: of anything. They could cross any limit and get away with it, right. And which is what was
[Guest]: bringing up a huge, an entire generation online, believing that this is what internet is.
[Guest]: And which is why I said, we chose a certain white space that there are every Tom, Dick and Harry says
[Guest]: that UGC app banate hain. Ye hi to banare, specially TikTok jaane ke baad toh baris type aa gayi thi
[Guest]: hink, right. All my investors message me, apna time aa gaya, aap toh UGC banate hain. Like, why?
[Guest]: Kyunki so many log banaye rahe hain, toh main usme kya karunga, right. The empty space, the fact
[Guest]: that most people thought ki Bharat premium deserve nahi karta hai is what was a problem for me.
[Guest]: Mujhe aisa lagta hai ki Bharat ko bhi premium content deserve, aisa aap, sabko aisa kyu lagta
[Guest]: hai ki Netflix jaisa premium content keval Delhi-Bombay walon ke liye hi hai. Mera gaon
[Guest]: ka aadmi ko wo premium content kyun nahi mil sakta? Woh phir bolte hain, acha Delhi shop hai,
[Guest]: Delhi shop hum sabko pata hai, it's a brainwashing, it's bullshit content essentially. I know it
[Guest]: works, it does amazing TRPs and all, but point is, can I not deliver great quality content?
[Guest]: Do you think that they don't want to consume quality content? And my entire fight has been
[Guest]: that they want to. Humne bahut hi hard stance liya ispe that we will not do any sex, violence and
[Guest]: abusive content on our app. Everything that we do has to be very family friendly. Imagine a Delhi
[Guest]: shop, but the stories will be very high quality, very high quality acting and something that will
[Guest]: leave them thinking that will, that will not be mindless basically, right? And that's the,
[Guest]: agar koi actual mein stage ko dhang se samjhe na, so that is the proof that we have been able
[Guest]: to create. The real POC stage is of the fact that Bharat wants to, if you provide, Bharat can
[Guest]: consume premium content, wants to consume premium content, sensible stuff and stories which are not
[Guest]: mindless. Kewal senseless sexual comedy nahi chalti hai Bharat mein, uske suvay bhi bahut
[Guest]: kuch chalta hai, is the entire revolution that we're trying to basically build up here.
[Amit Varma]: No, it's, it's incredible and another thing I was struck by is that you said that
[Amit Varma]: the demand is so much that you can't possibly keep up. And therefore, even when you make mistakes,
[Amit Varma]: even when some content isn't perfect, it is still extremely popular. Yes. So you're basically,
[Amit Varma]: your learning curve is coming at a profit. Yes, yes. They're very forgiving.
[Guest]: This user also realizes ki yaar iske pehle toh koi kuch dehi nahi raha tha. Koi toh hai.
[Guest]: Haan, koi toh hai jo kam sakam Haryanvi mein film banara abhi, web series banara abhi.
[Guest]: Toh, matlab, they are demanding also. That doesn't mean they're not demanding. They will,
[Guest]: they will come, critique, they will tell us and they're okay. They're like, theek hai,
[Guest]: as long as you're improving, they, they will come with a, jaise for example, humaari cable pehle
[Guest]: phone app thi and we didn't have a Android TV app and we received huge amount of complaints
[Guest]: about it. So they're demanding. They want the best of the experience. It was a revelation to me that
[Guest]: the, the penetration of Android TV in India is so huge that we don't even realize it's the,
[Guest]: matlab, we should build for those platforms. If there's an entrepreneur listening this,
[Guest]: somewhere out there. So, they're demanding. They want the best of the experiences,
[Guest]: but they're forgiving of the fact ki they realize ki yaar boss yeh aadmi kar raha hai kuch.
[Guest]: Toh they want to, you know, stand by you. They want to stick with you. They want to support you.
[Guest]: Jaise main logon ko bolta hai yaar, mera mote ek yeh bhi hai ki, any other OTT app, duniya mein
[Guest]: log film dekhne ke liye, web series dekhne ke liye, content dekhne ke liye download karte hain.
[Guest]: Humari app, woh baseline hai. Humari app, actual mein aadmi isliye download karte hain ki woh
[Guest]: Haryanvi mein. Uske liye, it's a matter of pride. Jo koi bhi product manager hai na,
[Guest]: kisi bhi product mein epic meaning dhundhta hai. Ki mai aisa kya bana doon ki is product
[Guest]: mein epic meaning mil jaye. Because that's when you become irrational. And you, your
[Guest]: retention becomes very high. Humari product mein by default hai woh. The epic meaning of the fact
[Guest]: that ki, yaar aap Haryana ke liye kar rahe ho. Aap Haryanvi ke liye kar rahe ho. Thank you for
[Guest]: doing this. It's a matter of pride for me. It's a very, very big deal for them. And this is a
[Amit Varma]: very big reason why they buy the subscription basically. And not just pride, I would imagine
[Amit Varma]: comfort zone also. Absolutely. So, I remember my father in his last years, he was brought up
[Amit Varma]: in Calcutta and so very Bengali by culture and retired in Chandigarh and lived there till he
[Amit Varma]: passed away. And in his last years, the only thing he would watch on television really was old
[Amit Varma]: Bengali serials. Because it's that comfort zone factor, ki this is my language and that sense of,
[Amit Varma]: you know, so I sort of totally get that. So, what are your sort of plans moving ahead now?
[Amit Varma]: Haryanvi hai, Rajasthani hai, you know, do you see this as sort of an all India play,
[Amit Varma]: ki har jagah hyper local karte hai? Because the hunger is clearly there. You have demonstrated
[Amit Varma]: against all conventional wisdom that they are willing to pay. So, aage kya plans hai aapke?
[Guest]: We have identified 18 such markets across the country, which have a minimum potential of 5
[Guest]: million paying households. So, hum ek parivaar ko ek TG maante hain bhajaye ki individual ko,
[Guest]: kyuki subscription ghar mein ek aadmi lega basically. So, 50 lakh people at least speak
[Guest]: a dialect and there are 18 such dialects and small languages, which basically have a potential to
[Guest]: replicate the same success all across. When we capture all these 18, we will be addressing
[Guest]: 50 to 60 percent of India's population through their own local dialects, basically. 125 million
[Guest]: households almost. We will most probably not do South a lot because wahan pe languages itself are
[Guest]: playing that role and it's a very crowded market and like very expensive market. So,
[Guest]: we probably will never do South. But everywhere else in this country, there's a huge potential.
[Guest]: We're already live in Rajasthani. We're going to launch Bhojpuri,
[Guest]: Maithili and Maghai within the next one year. And once we do that, then the rest of the Hindi belt,
[Guest]: which is Awadhi, Bundeli and then Pahadi, Chhattisgarhi. We're already talking to a
[Guest]: partner in Nepal to launch stage Nepali, something like that. Then Gujarati and basically Konkani and
[Guest]: basically the entire set of these things. So, this is absolutely an all-India play.
[Guest]: Isse main ek cheezo yaad aaya aapne usse main. Isse pe piche piche wale question bole jaye. I
[Guest]: want to make a point there about homogeneity. India ka last linguistic survey based on
[Guest]: dialects happened in 1901. Angrejo ne kiya tha. Humne uske baad kabhi nahi kiya.
[Guest]: Unnis hajaar dialects identified huye the India mein usse maa pe. Unnis hajaar. Aaj kebal 700
[Guest]: zinda hai usme se. Only 700 of them. Right? And it happened because of a simple reason that
[Guest]: aajadi ke baad humne ek political agenda ke antaragat basically ek desh, ek bhaasha aur
[Guest]: whatever bullshit basically we sold to people. And kuch toh colonial baggage tha. Kuch humne
[Guest]: apne logon ko bata diya ki Angreji ye nahi bologe toh tum inferior ho. Ab chalo internet
[Guest]: ke wajah se thankfully Hindi pe thoda wapis yun aagaya ki Hindi bol sakte hain aap kisi
[Guest]: business meeting mein, bhaasha mein, ye podcast mein hum Hindi bol pa rahe hain.
[Guest]: Nahin toh wo bhi allowed nahi tha pehle toh. Dialect pe toh bilkul na baba na type ka
[Guest]: situation hai. Right? And we feel, we make those people feel very bad. There are still
[Guest]: schools in this country in the rural parts where jab aap apni local language mein or
[Guest]: dialect mein bolte ho toh aap pe fine lagta hai. Wow. Theek hai. It used to happen in our
[Guest]: school and there are many friends that I have heard saying the same thing. Right? Toh bas
[Guest]: ye itna sa hi sapna hai ki across the country isko karein aur so that people can feel their
[Guest]: pride back on it. Aur ek baad aapko batao mein bhaasayen culture ka sabse acha tariqa
[Guest]: hoti hain usko sanjog ke rakhne ka. Culture preservation ke liye bhaasayen sabse important
[Guest]: hoti hain, local dialects. Kyunki jaise Haryanvi mein kuch geet hain jo shaadi mein gaya jaate
[Guest]: hain ya different different occasions pe humaarein folk gaya jaate hain. Right? They
[Guest]: have preserved the entire cultural elements around them. Right? Toh aisi bohot saari cheeje
[Guest]: hain jo hopefully hum over time carry kar paayenge and sense of pride restore kar paayenge
[Guest]: isme. We do have global aspirations also. Ek toh all the NRIs who are living outside
[Guest]: India unko, un bicharo ki bodi alag samasya hai. Unke jo bhi jo second generation, jo
[Guest]: bachche wahi pehda ho rahe hain, unko idea hi nahi hai ki unki culture hai kya? What
[Guest]: are their roots? And unfortunately, galti unki bhi nahi hai kyunki koi tariqa hi nahi
[Guest]: hai jaanne ka. Their only source of understanding India is Bollywood basically, which is not
[Guest]: a very great source, unfortunately. Right? So, so that and beyond that jaise jo humne
[Guest]: Haryana mein kiya, what stops us from doing the same thing in Nigeria or all the South
[Guest]: of all the African countries. Kyunki same, very distinct language, small population,
[Guest]: very distinct culture, but no local industry. Right? And you can do it and humse 5-7 saal
[Guest]: peeche hain in terms of internet, etc. So, very large business opportunity also that
[Guest]: way. A lot of South East Asia, Middle East, all of these places basically have this opportunity.
[Guest]: Parts of Europe have something like Ukraine, for example. Right? A very own distinct language
[Guest]: and some local industry, but not like a lot of it. Right? So, you can go and build a platform
[Guest]: there. Toh is tarah se bahut saari global opportunity hai. Agar if this works out,
[Amit Varma]: then this can become a very huge company. Amazing. Aap operating system toh bana nahi
[Amit Varma]: paya. But maybe this will take you where that was intended to. So, you know, you had earlier
[Amit Varma]: said in this episode that the biggest gift you can give someone is a gift of time. And I agree.
[Amit Varma]: So thank you so much for your graciousness today before you before we sign off one last question
[Amit Varma]: for you know, which I end most of my episodes with, which is for you know, for my listeners
[Amit Varma]: and me, can you recommend either films or music or web series or books or whatever,
[Amit Varma]: whatever form of art has meant a lot to you in your life, you know, which which would be desert
[Amit Varma]: island is for you in a manner of speaking. So, you know, what would you like to recommend?
[Guest]: So before I name any of this stuff, I'll tell you. So I like I said, I watch a lot of content and
[Guest]: mostly English content. One of the ways to so I look at English films as a way of learning for
[Guest]: me entertainment. So the beauty of English content is what I realized is
[Guest]: and they're more like words of wisdom. So when I watch any content, I keep looking for that
[Guest]: that line, basically, that learning that life lesson.
[Guest]: And I've seen it almost except completely senseless content. But otherwise, this is almost
[Guest]: without exception. This is more like a that they have this line. So look for that.
[Guest]: To before I recommend anything, I'll, I'll recommend a way to watch content that
[Guest]: if you are watching and it is not just about entertainment and try and look for that
[Guest]: dialogue. Can you give an example of something like this?
[Guest]: But
[Guest]: of course, this guy is taking a beating.
[Guest]: Basically,
[Guest]: the guy takes keeps taking like take keeps on taking the beating and
[Guest]: that is when this guy says now and the learning for me was basically that,
[Guest]: that you have to wait for the right time to make the best impact basically, you know,
[Guest]: you, you may not be the best guy in the ring, but you can choose to, you know,
[Guest]: preserve your energy while the rest of them fight it out and, you know, make the best use of it.
[Guest]: Right. So,
[Guest]: so, so many other films.
[Guest]: I watch anything, everything about space. You would have guessed that. So
[Guest]: Martian is one of my favorite films, right?
[Guest]: I also watch a lot of web series content.
[Guest]: I'm right now watching a web series called The Good Doctor.
[Guest]: It's one of the most amazing content that I see.
[Guest]: I don't understand anything about the doctor stuff that they do in the episode.
[Guest]: But I think it's a very compassionate content.
[Guest]: It's a very amazingly made content.
[Guest]: And there are such amazing life lessons throughout every single episode
[Guest]: that you can't even imagine.
[Guest]: I think all my liberal nature was built out of watching a lot of Hollywood stuff, I think.
[Guest]: I got a lot of influence from there.
[Guest]: So The Good Doctor is one of them.
[Guest]: In terms of books, I would say there's a book called Hard Thing About Hard Things.
[Guest]: It has influenced me quite a lot.
[Guest]: There's a book that I read about from Simon Sinek, which is The Infinite Game.
[Guest]: I think that book spoke to me because I basically follow the same philosophy in life.
[Guest]: I think that book helped me articulate a lot of it that businesses in life itself are infinite
[Guest]: games.
[Guest]: There are no winners here.
[Guest]: And there are no rules here.
[Guest]: You play it to enjoy it, basically.
[Guest]: So I used to think that it's not about the destination, but about enjoying the journey.
[Guest]: So there's a different version of this.
[Guest]: That book is amazing.
[Guest]: You should read it.
[Guest]: A lot of very nice anecdotes in that book.
[Guest]: And you end up with basically understanding the idea of this thing.
[Guest]: There is, as entrepreneurs, if you're starting up, please read Zero to One and please read
[Guest]: Lean Startup, which is like very cliche recommendations, but two of the most amazing books that you
[Guest]: can read as an initial entrepreneur.
[Guest]: Actually, if you are starting up as an entrepreneur, then one of the things that helped me the
[Guest]: most, and I did not discover it when I was starting, but I discovered it three years
[Guest]: ago when I was starting again at stage.
[Guest]: And I learned so much from it.
[Guest]: And I was able to appreciate better because I had been in the grind for 8 years.
[Guest]: It is a playlist from Y Combinator.
[Guest]: They have a platform called StartupSchool.org.
[Guest]: Go sign up on that.
[Guest]: Fill in the details about the company that you're building or want to build.
[Guest]: And they curate an entire list of lectures for you and essays.
[Guest]: They curate a whole course of 20 to 25 videos and essays for you based on your startup.
[Guest]: And it is probably one of the best things that I have ever taken.
[Guest]: Every morning we would join on a Zoom call.
[Guest]: We did it during the pandemic.
[Guest]: We used to join for an hour and we would watch the video or read the essay together basically
[Guest]: on a Zoom call.
[Guest]: It was probably the most important stuff that we learned as entrepreneurs basically through
[Guest]: that.
[Guest]: So please do watch that.
[Guest]: Sign up for StartupSchool.org platform if you are starting up as an entrepreneur.
[Guest]: Yeah, that's mostly it basically.
[Amit Varma]: I have to tell you, this is one of the most inspiring conversations I've had on my show.
[Amit Varma]: So thank you so much for your time and all your insights.
[Guest]: Thank you so much.
[Guest]: It means a lot coming from you because you've done too many of them and you meet some really
[Guest]: amazing people.
[Guest]: Thank you so much.